This  is  a  digital  copy  of  a  book  that  was  preserved  for  generations  on  library  shelves  before  it  was  carefully  scanned  by  Google  as  part  of  a  project 
to  make  the  world's  books  discoverable  online. 

It  has  survived  long  enough  for  the  copyright  to  expire  and  the  book  to  enter  the  public  domain.  A  public  domain  book  is  one  that  was  never  subject 
to  copyright  or  whose  legal  copyright  term  has  expired.  Whether  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  may  vary  country  to  country.  Public  domain  books 
are  our  gateways  to  the  past,  representing  a  wealth  of  history,  culture  and  knowledge  that's  often  difficult  to  discover. 

Marks,  notations  and  other  marginalia  present  in  the  original  volume  will  appear  in  this  file  -  a  reminder  of  this  book's  long  journey  from  the 
publisher  to  a  library  and  finally  to  you. 

Usage  guidelines 

Google  is  proud  to  partner  with  libraries  to  digitize  public  domain  materials  and  make  them  widely  accessible.  Public  domain  books  belong  to  the 
public  and  we  are  merely  their  custodians.  Nevertheless,  this  work  is  expensive,  so  in  order  to  keep  providing  this  resource,  we  have  taken  steps  to 
prevent  abuse  by  commercial  parties,  including  placing  technical  restrictions  on  automated  querying. 

We  also  ask  that  you: 

+  Make  non-commercial  use  of  the  files  We  designed  Google  Book  Search  for  use  by  individuals,  and  we  request  that  you  use  these  files  for 
personal,  non-commercial  purposes. 

+  Refrain  from  automated  querying  Do  not  send  automated  queries  of  any  sort  to  Google's  system:  If  you  are  conducting  research  on  machine 
translation,  optical  character  recognition  or  other  areas  where  access  to  a  large  amount  of  text  is  helpful,  please  contact  us.  We  encourage  the 
use  of  public  domain  materials  for  these  purposes  and  may  be  able  to  help. 

+  Maintain  attribution  The  Google  "watermark"  you  see  on  each  file  is  essential  for  informing  people  about  this  project  and  helping  them  find 
additional  materials  through  Google  Book  Search.  Please  do  not  remove  it. 

+  Keep  it  legal  Whatever  your  use,  remember  that  you  are  responsible  for  ensuring  that  what  you  are  doing  is  legal.  Do  not  assume  that  just 
because  we  believe  a  book  is  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  the  United  States,  that  the  work  is  also  in  the  public  domain  for  users  in  other 
countries.  Whether  a  book  is  still  in  copyright  varies  from  country  to  country,  and  we  can't  offer  guidance  on  whether  any  specific  use  of 
any  specific  book  is  allowed.  Please  do  not  assume  that  a  book's  appearance  in  Google  Book  Search  means  it  can  be  used  in  any  manner 
anywhere  in  the  world.  Copyright  infringement  liability  can  be  quite  severe. 

About  Google  Book  Search 

Google's  mission  is  to  organize  the  world's  information  and  to  make  it  universally  accessible  and  useful.  Google  Book  Search  helps  readers 
discover  the  world's  books  while  helping  authors  and  publishers  reach  new  audiences.  You  can  search  through  the  full  text  of  this  book  on  the  web 

at  http  :  //books  .  google  .  com/| 


Digitized  by 


Google 


<^</'^3J.,  /</^r  / 


SllBII51l5ll51IBI151l5H5ll5llBllgll5llglll5i 


i 

i 
i 
i 

i 
i 
i 
i 


Harvard  College 
Library 


FROM  THE  BEQUEST  OF 

SUSAN  GREENE  DEXTER 


IBMBHBIIBIIBIIBUBIEJIBJIBIIBIIBUBIIB 


i 

i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 
i 

i 
1 


r 


Digitized  by 


G  oogle 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY 


FOR 


ALL 


TO    WHICH    IS    ADDED    A   COMPLETE    SYSTEM 
OF    PREDICTIVE    ASTROLOGY    FOR    ADVANCED 

STUDENTS 


BY 


ALAN    LEO 


**  Be  humble  if  thou  would*st  attain  to  Wisdom, 
Be  humbler  still  when  Wisdom  thou  hast  mastered." 

Voice  of  the  Silence. 


Published  at  9»  Lyncroft  Gardens,  West  Hampstead,  London,  N.W. 

1899 

(All  rights  reserved 

L.  1^ .   Fowler  &   Co.,  r^r^r^rrl/^ 

7,  Imkbial  Ak.ai>e,  Lcd«am  OnoMk  °'9'*'^^^  by^OOglC 


/./i^,  / 


HARVARD  COUEQE  LIBRARY 

DEXTER  FUND  r 

f 


Digitized  by 


Google 


INTRODUCTION 

Many  attempts  have  been  made  to  bring  the  study  of  Astrology 
within  the  reach  of  all  persons  endowed  with  an  active  mind  ;  but, 
owing  to  the  magnitude  of  the  subject,  and  the  great  amount  of  time 
and  labour  required  to  reduce  a  metaphysical  science  into  terms  of 
natural  philosophy,  the  object  has  hitherto  been  only  partly  achieved. 
In  the  present  work  a  final  attempt  is  made  by  the  author  to  reach 
the  multitude  of  earnest  and  thinking  searchers  after  truth  ;  whose 
numbers  are  steadily  increasing,  and  especially  those  who  wish  to 
have  some  practical  demonstration  of  the  widespread  belief  that  a 
wise  Ruler  is  behind  all  manifestation  of  life,  guiding  and  influencing 
humanity  towards  a  perfect  ending — the  Millennium — in  which  perfec- 
tion is  the  goal. 

The  day  is  past  for  writing  a  defence  of  Astrology,  and  no 
amount  of  argument  will  ever  convince  the  sceptic,  who  is  either  too 
perverse  or  too  indolent  to  investigate  so  grand  a  science  as  Astrology, 
a  science  which  explains  the  law  that  governs  all  things.  The  best 
test  that  can  be  applied  to  this,  as  to  all  other  subjects  where  first 
hand  knowledge  is  required,  is  that  of  experience. 

Reason,  thought,  and  experience  are  the  basis  upon  which  the 
system  adopted  in  this  work  is  built.  The  ripened  fruit  of  many 
years*  toil  and  practice  are  offered  to  those  who  are  sufficiently  thirsty 
for  the  knowledge  that  Astrology  brings  to  mankind,  and  the  main 
abject  of  the  present  publication  is  that  of  ^satisfying  a  demand  made 
by  the  growing  students  of  Astrology  for  more  light. 

Astrology  is  the  oldest  of  all  sciences.  Its  history  can  be  traced 
so  far  into  the  past  that  it  becomes  a  hopeless  task  to  actually  dis- 
cover when  and  where  it  had  its  origin.  From  Babylonia  and  the 
Chaldeans  we  find  a  belief  in  Astrology  spreading  throughout  the 
whole  world.  Once  the  religion  of  a  great  and  mighty  race,  it  taught 
its  people  wisely,  lifting  their  aspirations  by  fiaith,  hope  and  rever- 
ence through  the  media  of  the  planetary  spirits  to  the  supreme  One 
and  Universal  Spirit,  the  Logos  of  the  solar  system. 

Since  the  days  of  happy  Chaldea,  whose  wise  priests  by  the  ex- 
pansion of  their  consciousness  could  reach  the  shining  ones,  the  star 
of  Astrology  appears  to  have  waned,  and  for  the  multitude  to  have 
entirely  disappeared.  Its  rediscovery  is  due  to  the  spiritual  activity 
that  is  again  reviving  the  wisdom  religion  taught  by  Pythagoras  and 
his  earnest  followers,  and  now  once  again  we  hope  to  see  the  star  of 
stars  slowly  rising  to  again  shine  in  all  the  splendour  of  its  beneficfent 
glory. 

B6r6sus,  the  Chaldean  priest,  to  whom  a  statue  with  a  gilt 
tongue  was  erected  at  Athens,  translated  the  Illumination  of  Bel,  an 
early  Babylonian  work,  and  introduced  Astrology  into  Greece.  The 
Greeks  held  the  old  traditions  for  a  time,  but  it  became  more  an  art 
than  a  science  with  them,  and  had  so  far  waned  that  little  trace  of 
the  original  Astrology  can  be  found,  and  it  was  left  to  the  Romans 
to  finally  destroy  the  little  life  that  was  left  in  it  as  an  exoteric  study. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J 


IV  INTRODUCTION 

In  spite  of  strong  governnaental  opposition  it  flourished  in  the 
early  days  of  the  Roman  Empire,  but  through  the  pandering 
of  its  exponents  to  political  exigencies  it  became  corrupted,  and 
sank  into  what  was  known  as  judicial  Astrology,  finally  becoming 
nothing  more  than  a  form  of  divination  by  which  horoscopes  were 
cast  for  the  hour.  By  this  time  the  knowledge  of  Uranus, 
the  astrologer's  star,  had  entirely  disappeared,  and  substitutes 
were  used  in  horary  Astrology  to  supply  the  place  of  the  mystic 
planet ;  the  old  traditions  were  also  lost,  or  became  so  corrupted  and 
distorted,  that  Astrology  could  no  longer  be  called  a  science,  but  a 
miserable  form  of  fortune-telling  divination. 

To  restore  the  Astrology  of  the  Chaldeans  is  the  only  hope  that 
is  left  for  all  who  would  make  Astrology  a  practical  and  beneficial 
study.  With  all  due  respect  to  the  modern  exponents  of  the  science, 
we  are  bound  to  admit  that  their  study  has  been  mixed  with  too 
many  terms  and  definitions  belonging  to  horary  Astrology,  a  system 
from  which  no  comparisons  can  be  drawn  when  considering  the 
methods  of  astrological  practice  taught  by  the  wise  men  of  the  east. 

The  discoveries  of  Egyptologists  prove  that  the  Egyptians  had  no 
claim  to  the  invention  of  Astrology,  they  were  taught  by  the  Chal- 
dean priests,  who  believed  that  "  An  affinity  existed  between  the  stars 
and  the  souls  of  men  ;  that  the  ethereal  essence  is  Divine ;  that  the 
souls  of  men  are  taken  from  this  reservoir,  and  return  to  it  at  death  ; 
and  that  the  souls  of  the  more  eminent  of  mankind  are  converted  into 
stars."  With  them,  "  the  soul  was  a  spark  taken  from  the  stellar 
essence,"  a  belief  held  also  by  the  great  Pythagoras. 

When  we  come  to  consider  that  Astrology  was  the  beginning 
of  most  that  we  hold  valuable  in  art,  literature,  religion  and  science, 
and  know  that  the  constellations  were  our  first  pictures,  also  that 
astronomy,  and  to  a  certain  extent  mathematics,  sprang  from  Chaldean 
Astrology,  we  may  judge  of  its  value  to  humanity,  and  wonder  not  at 
its  survival  amidst  the  fall  of  nations  and  decline  of  mighty  races. 

The  truth  can  never  be  destroyed,  and  when  we  recognise  in 
Astrology  the  law  of  the  Supreme  Ruler  of  our  solar  system,  we  need 
some  courage  (to  say  nothing  of  mental  ability,)  before  we  commence 
the  task  of  learning  the  harmony  of  that  law ;  and  yet,  the  same 
energy  that  is  expended  in  seeking  to  refute  it,  if  turned  in  the  direc- 
tion of  learning  its  first  principles,  would  unbar  the  gate  that  leads  to 
its  understanding.  For  the  first  time  since  the  glorious  days  of  wise 
Chaldea,  an  attempt  is  made  in  the  following  pages  to  place  before 
the  world  the  true  Chaldean  system  of  Astrology,  freed  from  the  limi- 
tations of  bigotry,  prejudice  and  selfish  motives.  That  truth  has 
been  preserved  in  its  symbology,  and  so  plain  are  its  symbols  that  he 
who  runs  can  read.  The  time  has  come  to  again  reveal  the  hidden 
meaning  concealed  so  long  in  circle,  cross,  and  star.  We  have  com- 
menced the  task  in  these  pages,  by  removing  some  of  the  debris  that 
has  fallen  around  the  title  during  the  past  ages,  and  one  desire  alone 
prompts  our  writing,  the  desire  to  serve  humanity,  and  give  to  those 
who  possess  an  eager  intellect  and  a  pure  love  of  truth,  some  of  the 
crumbs  that  have  fallen  from  the  table  of  those  wise  occultists  whom 
the  author  is  truly  grateful  to  know  as  teachers. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^BtroloQjD  for  ^U 

CHAPTER  I. 
First  Steps. — Astronomy. 

Before  entering  upon  a  study  of  Astrology  it  is  advisable  to  have 
some  clear  ideas  concerning  the  Solar  System,  and  these  may  be 
obtained  without  going  into  all  the  elaborate  details  connected  with 
Astronomy.  A  general  understanding  of  its  broad  outlines  is  there- 
fore all  that  is  necessary,  and  without  becoming  proficient  in  mathe- 
matics anyone  of  ordinary  education  may  follow  quite  easily  all  we 
shall  have  to  say  upon  the  subject. 

Astronomy  gives  a  knowledge  of  the  celestial  bodies,  their 
magnitudes,  motions,  distances,  periods,  eclipses,  size,  weight,  order, 
etc.,  and  generally  takes  us  beyond  the  solar  system  far  away  in 
space,  amid  the  fixed  stars,  which  are  now,  by  nearly  all  astronomers, 
believed  to  be  central  suns  of  other  solar  systems. 

The  Universe  contains  an  infinite  number  of  these  solar 
systems,  each  more  or  less  great  than  our  own.  When  we  realise 
this  the  vision  niust  widen,  our  minds  expand,  and  our  hearts  be- 
come filled  with  wonder  and  reverence  for  that  Great  Supreme  and 
unknowable  Power,  that  is  the  primary  cause  of  all  the  glory  that 
fills  space,  and  supports  the  grand  whole.  But  no  amount  of  specu- 
lation concerning  other  solar  systems  can  reveal  the  true  state  of 
things  in  the  broad  expanse  of  the  heavens.  It,  therefore,  becomes 
more  profitable  to  us,  at  our  present  stage,  to  confine  our  attention  to 
the  solar  system  of  which  we  form  a  part,  leaving  the  fixed  stars,  with 
their  immense  distances  and  magnitude,  out  of  our  consideration. 

If  we  draw  a  circle  and  consider  it  the  boundary  of  all  the  space 
within,  and  place  in  the  centre  a  single  dot,  we  shall  have  focussed 
our  attention  upon  a  miniature  copy  of  ourselves  in  space.  If  we 
could  now  expand  our  imagination  and  think  of  our  Sun  as  being  in  the 
centre  of  an  enormous  ring,  the  boundary  circle  extending  millions  of 
miles  into  space,  embracing  the  whole  solar  system,  we  might  begin 
to  realise  what  the  circumference  of  a  solar  system  means.  It  will  be 
well  to  ponder  over  this  wonderful  system.     In  the  days  of  Chaldea 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2  ASTROLOGY    FOR    ALL 

the  Sun  was  recognised  as  the  home  and  source  of  the  primal  energy, 
from  which  came  all  life  and  light,  being  the  prime  moving  spirit,  in 
fact  the  centre,  or  as  we  would  term  it  for  practical  purposes,"  the  body 
of  the  Logos  of  the  solar  system.  From  this  glorious  body  radiates 
the  light  which  illuminates  the  whole  system,  and  there  can  be  no 
grander  conception  of  God  than  this  idea  of  the  Logos  who  sustains 
the  whole  of  His  universe  through  His  manifestation.  **  In  Him  we 
live,  and  move,  and  have  our  being,"  truly. 

All  narrow  and  bigoted  conceptions  of  religion  must  fade  into  in- 
significance when  we  realise  that  the  Sun  is  the  light,  and  the  life,  of 
the  whole  system. 

Can  we  wonder  at  the  Chaldeans'  worship  of  the  Sun  when  they 
knew  that  the  Father  pours  forth  His  spirit  over  the  whole  world ; 
they  worshipped  that  Spirit,  seeking  to  become  filled  with  it  by 
such  love  and  devotion  as  we  now  seem  to  be  incapable  of;  their  civi- 
lisation was  at  its  height  thousands  of  years  ago,  for  time  is  past 
our  reckoning  when  dealing  with  the  stars  and  evolution. 

It  is  now  astronomically  accepted  that  the  whole  solar  system 
was  a  vast  heated  nebulous  mass  which,  cooling  down,  threw  off  huge 
portions,  finally  becoming  planets  or  worlds,  forming  a  complete 
system  of  worlds  revolving  round  the  Sun. 

We  cannot  fully  estimate  what  we  owe  to  Pythagoras,  who 
upheld  the  belief  that  the  Sun  was  at  rest  at  the  centre  of  the  uni- 
verse, and  that  the  heavenly  bodies  all  moved  round  that  centre. 
This  knowledge  he  had  gained  from  the  Chaldeans,  but  it  was  not 
generally  accepted,  and  that  which  is  known  as  the  Ptolemaic  system 
later  on  became  firmly  established,  and  so  strong  a  hold  had  this  idea 
upon  the  people  about  the  year  1500,  that  it  was  first  folly,  then  mad- 
ness, and  finally  impious  heresy,  to  assert  that  the  earth  was  not 
stationary. 

About  the  year  1507  Copernicus  began  to  restore  the  Pytha- 
gorean system,  completing  his  work  about  thirty  years  later.  But 
Europe  was  now  under  the  bondage  of  prejudice  and  ignorance,  and 
the  same  fate  awaited  this  genius  as  that  aflforded  to  other  great  philo- 
sophers, and  the  revived  system  met  with  nothing  but  opposition,  and 
later,  Galileo,  the  champion  of  the  Copernican  doctrine,  through  religi- 
ous bigotry,  was  made  to  renounce  his  belief  before  the  Inquisition.  Yet 
Galileo  persevered  and  wrote  his  celebrated  Dialogtus,  which  had  their 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR  ALL  3 

after  effect,  but  at  the  time,  reawakened  the  anger  of  the  Inquisitors, 
and .  at  seventy  years  of  age  Galileo  was  brought  before  that  dread 
tribunal  and  escaped  the  fatal  penalty  only  to  be  imprisoned  in  one  of 
their  loathsome  dungeons,  where,  to  save  his  life,  at  Rome  in  the  Con- 
vent of  Minerva, on  June  22nd,  1633,  he  signed  a  document,  in  which  he 
professes  **  with  sincere  heart  and  faith  unfeigned  to  abjure,  execrate 
and  detest  the  error  and  heresy  of  believing  and  teaching  that  the 
Sun  is  the  centre  of  the  world  and  immovable,  and  that  the  earth  is 
not  the  centre,  and  moves,  a  doctrine  repugnant  to  Holy  Scripture." 

But  the  good  work  had  begun,  and  the  reformation  finished  it, 
and  in  our  time  we  are  returning  to  the  truths  taught  thousands  of 
years  ago.  Astrology  has  always  been  based  upon  the  fact  that  the- 
Sun  is  the  centre  of  the  solar  system.  It  could  not  be  a  solar  sys- 
tem otherwise.  Revolving  round  the  Sun,  then,  we  have  several 
planets.  The  first  is  yet  to  be  discovered  by  astronomers,  called 
Vulcan.  Then  Mercury,  who  performs  a  revolution  round  the  Sun 
in  88  days,  23J  hours,  which  makes  the  length  of  his  year.  The 
distance  of  this  planet  from  the  Sun  is  about  thirty-six  million  miles; 
he  is  a  small  planet  shining  with  a  pale  bluish  light,  but  he  is  never 
more  than  about  30  degrees  from  the  Sun,  and  is,  therefore,  rarely 
visible  to  the  naked  eye.  This  planet  was  typically  known  as  Hermes, 
also  as  the  winged  Messenger  of  the  Gods,  by  the  mythologists.  The 
Chaldeans  called  him  Nebo,  and  he  has  always  been  the  planet  of 
warning.  It  is  interesting  to  note  that  this  planet  is  destined  to  be- 
come the  future  physical  home  for  the  majority  of  our  humanity, 
and  he  belongs  to  our  chain  of  worlds.    His  symbol  is  made'thus  ; 

Venus,  next  in  order  from  the  Sun,  is  nearly  sixty-seven  million 
miles  distant  from  the  centre,  and  makes  one  annual  revolution  in  224 
days,  17  hours;  the  length  of  this  planet's  day  is  almost  similar  to  our 
own.  She  is  the  bright  evening  star,  often  seen  about  sunset,  and 
when  she  rises  before  the  Sun  she  .is  the  morning  star.  We  learn 
from  those  more  advanced  that  she  is  inhabited,  and  her  humanity  has 
advanced  to  a  very  high  stage  toward  perfection  :  for  each  planet  is  a 
physical  world  for  the  purpose  of  evolution,  as  we  shall  learn  later. 

Venus  was  known  as  Aphrodite — when  the  morning  star  as 
Lucifer,  and  at  r~^  evening  Vesper.  Her  symbol  is  a  circle  surmount- 
ing the  cross,      -f- 

The  Earth  is  the  next  in  order  of  the  planets  and  our  distance  is 


:;y 


Digitized  by 


Google 


4  ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL 

about  ninety-two  million  miles  from  the  Sun.  The  earth  moves  once 
round  the  Sun  in  what  we  know  in  time  as  one  year,  and  also  rotates 
upon  hei  own  axis  once  in  24  hours  ;  this  is  important  to  remember. 

There  is  also  another  motion  which  arises  from  the  precession  of 
the  equinoxes,  which  is  equal  to  about  50  seconds  in  a  year.  There 
is  also  the  decrease  in  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic  of  about  52  seconds 
in  a  century. 

The  earth  is  surrounded  by  a  substance  of  mixed  gases  called 
the  atmosphere,  by  which  ligbt  is  reflected  and  dispersed.  This 
atmosphere,  from  being  dense  at  the  surface,  becomes  more  rarefied 
as  distance  increases.  In  this  atmosphere,  or  air,  we  breathe,  and 
in  it  arise  the  phenomena  of  lightning,  thunder,  wind  and  rain. 
The  clouds  are  the  vapours  which  rise  from  the  earth  and  these 
condense,  to  fall  in  showers,  as  their  specific  gravity  is  then  greater 
than  that  of  the  atmosphere.  The  earth  was  known  as  Rhea, 
and  the  symbol  is  a  cross  within  a  circle  ®.  The  Moon  is  a 
satellite  of  the  earth,  making  a  revolution  around  us  in  an  elliptical 
orbit  in  29^  days,  she  also  appears  to  revolve  from  one  point  in  the 
heavens  to  the  same  point  again  in  27  days,  7  hours,  43  minutes ;  she 
is  240,000  miles  from  the  earth.  The  Moon  is  an  important  body  in 
Astrology,  and  should  be  very  carefully  studied  astronomically. 

The  Moon  may  be  called  the  mother  of  the  earth,  for  all  life  that 
once  existed  there,  together  with  its  water  and  atmosphere,  has  been 
drawn  off  by  the  earth,  the  Moon  being  the  physical  globe  in  a  past  chain 
of  worlds  connected  with  our  evolution  ;  she  has  been  best  known  ^a\ 
as  Luna  or  Isis.     Her  symbol  is  the  half-circle  or  the  crescent.     JJ 

Next  to  our  earth  is  the  planet  Mars,  who  is  about  139  million 
miles  from  the  Sun,  has  a  year  of  687  of  our  days,  and  his  day  is 
about  45  minutes  longer  than  our  own.  He  has  been  known  as  the 
god  of  war  and  hunting,  and  by  the  names  of  Ares  and  Nimrod ;  his 
mission  appears  to  have  been   1   to  dispel  terror  and  fear.  His  symbol 


"A 


is  the  circle  under  the  cross  r\.     This  planet  belongs  to  our  chain 


of  worlds 


The  circles  of  the  Asteroids  come  next,  the  principal  planets, 
which  are  small,  being  Vesta,  Juno,  Ceres,  and  Pallas.  The  swarm 
of  Asteroids  are  said  to  be  raw  material  for  another  planetary  system. 

Next  we  come  10  the  largest  orb  next  to  the  Sun  in  our  solar 
system,  Jupiter,  who  is  about  475  million  miles  from  the  centre,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 


takes  twelve  years  in  going  round  the  Sun  ;  his  day  consists  of 
about  ten  hours.  Jupiter  is  the  next  brightest  planet  to  Venus,  and 
is  accompanied  by  four  satellites.  It  is  in  course  of  preparation  for 
its  humanity,  being  at  present  uninhabited.  This  planet  has 
been  known  as  Zeus,  his  symbol  is  the  half  circle  over  the 
cross. 

Saturn,  the  next  planet  in  order,  is  877  million  miles  from  the 
centre,  and  he  takes  nearly  thirty  years  to  revolve  round  the  Sun  ;  the 
length  of  his  day  is  over  twelve  hours,  he  is  surrounded  by  rings, 
and  nine  Moons.     Saturn  was  the  son  of  Uranus,  and  was  known 
as  Chronos.     His  symbol  is  the  half  circle  under  the  cross. 

Beyond  Saturn  is  Ui:anus,  commonly  called  Herschel  after  its 
re-discoverer.  His  distance  from  the  Sun  is  about  1,754  niillion  miles', 
he  revolves  round  the  solar  orb  once  in  84  of  our  years,  being  accom- 
panied by  six  satellites.      He  was  known  as  Ouranus. 

Next  to  Uranus  comes  Neptune,  the  most  distant  planet  as  yet 
discovered,  who  revolves  round  the  Sun  at  a  distance  of  about  2,747 
millions  of  miles,  and  his  year  is  equal  to  165  of  our  years. 

Beyond  Neptune  there  are  two  other  planets,  as  yet  unknown  to 
physical  science. 


^ 


V 


Astronomical  Table 


j-^      Distance  from  the 
Name  of  Planet,  g.  Sun. 


Mercury  - 
Venus 
The  Earth 
.Mars 
Jupiter     - 
Saturn 
Uranus    - 
Neptune  - 


9 

u 


35,392,000 
66.131,500 
91,430,200 
139,312,200 
475»693'ioo 
872,134,600 
753^8511000 
746.271,200 


Length  of 

Hourly 

Diameter. 

Rotation. 

Day. 

Orbit. 

Moons. 

Miles. 

Days, 

Hrs.  Mins, 

Miles. 

2,900 

88 

24           5    105,000 

!    0 

7»5io 

225 

2i         21   1  77,050 

0 

7.913 

365i 

24           0  1  ^5.533 

!     I 

4.920 

687 

24         i7  '  53.090 

2 

88,390 

4.333 

9         55  i  28,744 

;  4 

71,900 

10,759 

10      29  !  21,221 

■   9 

33.000 

30,687 

9      30  1  14.963 

1  4 

36,000 

60,127 

) 

11,958 

I 

The  Earth's  mean  distance  from  the  Moon  ^  238,000  miles. 
The  variation  of  distance  of  the  Moon   from  the  Earth  is  26,000  miles, 
whilst  that  of  the  Earth  from  the  Sun  is  3,500,000  miles. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


6  ASTROLOGY    FOR    ALL 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  Earth  and  the  Zodiac 

The  Earth  revolves  around  the  Sun,  making  one  complete  circuit 
around  that  centre  m  a  period  of  365J  days,  which  we  term  one  year. 
In  this  revolution  round  the  Sun,  the  solar  orb  is  seen  from  the 
earth  through  one  of  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac.  The  astronomi- 
cal and  astrological  year  commences  about  the  21st  of  March  in  each 
year,  at  this  time  the  Sun  is  said  to  enter  the  sign  Aries,  the  first  sign 
of  the  zodiac,  and  then  passes  through  the  whole  twelve  signs  con- 
tained in  the  360  degrees  of  the  circle  ;  this  journey  of  the  earth 
around  the  Sun  which  causes  that  luminary  to  appear  in  these  signs 
each  month  takes  a  period  of  a  little  over  365  days.  This  marks  off 
one  distinct  division  so  far  as  the  zodiac  is  concerned,  and  gives  us 
the  primary  considerations  of  the  signs  through  which  the  Sun's  ray 
passes,  and  by  this  we  judge  the  internal  or  individual  characteristics 
of  the  person  born  in  that  particular  month  ;  this  gives  us  twelve 
kinds  of  people,  twelve  types  that  stand  out  very  clearly  and  definite, 
the  definiteness  being  the  more  marked  as  the  Sun's  rays  pass  through 
the  middle  degrees  of  each  sign,  a  sign  consisting  of  exactly  30 
degrees. 

The  earth  also  revolves  once  upon  her  own  axis  every  24  hours, 
and  this  causes  each  portion  of  the  earth  to  pass  through  the  whole 
twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac  once  in  each  day  of  24  hours,  a  fresh 
sign  rising  upon  the  ascendant  at  the  place  of  birth  every  two 
hours,  and  one  separate  degree  of  the  zodiac  every  four  minutes  ;  by 
this  we  have  an  entirely  different  individual  born  every  four  minutes 
in  time.  It  should  be  remembered  that  time  and  space  are  described 
in  terms  of  minutes  and  degrees  respectively.  Every  four  minutes 
of  time  equals  i  degree  in  space,  thus  every  15  degrees  in  space  are 
equal  to  one  hour  in  time,  and  30  degrees,  or  one  whole  sign  of  the 
zodiac,  equals  two  hours  in  time,  and  from  this  it  will  be  seen  that  a 
given  point  on  the  earth  will  be  two  hours  in  passing  through  one  sign 
of  the  zodiac,  but  the  Sun  takes  one  month  to  pass  through  the  sign. 
It  can  now  be  seen  that  the  earth  is  one  day  of  24  hours  passing 
through  the  zodiac  containing  twelve  signs,  and  the  Sun  takes 
one  year  to  pass  through  the  circle.  These  two  separate  apparent 
motions  of  the  earth  and  Sun  must  be  clearly  thought  out,  and  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR    ALL 


astronomical  fact  of  the  two  revolutions  of  the  earth  remembered  ; 
once  round  the  Sun,  and  once  upon  her  own  axis,  the  former  taking 
a  year  of  twelve  months,  and  the  latter  a  day  of  24  hours  ;  **  a  day  is 
as  a  year  in  the  sight  of  the  Lord." 

There  is  still  another  motion  through  the  zodiac  which  we  must 
consider,  making  three  motions-  in  all — that  is,  the  motion  of  the 
Moon  around  the  earth,  once  every  lunar  month  of  28  days.  The 
Moon  takes  2^  days  to  pass  through  each  sign,  making  the  complete 
circuit  in  a  mooneth  or  lunar  month,  a  consideration  that  we  will  take 
up  later  on. 

It  must  be  now  clearly  understood  that  there  are  three  very  im- 
portant considerations  with  regard  to  the  signs  of  the  zodiac.  First, 
the  position  of  the  Sun  each  month,  caused  by  the  annual  revolution 
of  the  earth  round  the  Sun,  passing  through  the  signs  each  month, 
given  in  detail  at  the  end  of  this  chapter.  Secondly,  the  Moon's 
place  in  the  zodiac  each  month  ;  and  finally,  the  earth's  daily  revolu- 
tion upon  her  own  axis. 

The  zodiac  is  one  of  the  most  important  factors  to  become  thor- 
oughly acquainted  with,  this  being  the  track,  or  belt,  through  which  all 
the  planets  pass  ;  it  is  commonly  known  as  the  ecliptic,  cutting,  as  it 
were,  the  equator  at  the  spot  that  is  called  the  first  point  of  Aries. 
The  signs  of  the  zodiac  should  never  be  confused  with  the  twelve  con- 
stellations of  the  same  name ;  at  certain  periods  of  the  world's  evo- 
lution the  signs  and  the  constellations  correspond,  but  this  will  be 
thoroughly  explained  in  its  proper  place.  The  diagram,  the  signs  of 
the  zodiac,  and  the  paragraph  that  follows  them  should  now  be  well 
studied. 

8 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 


The  twelve  zodiacal  signs  and  their  symbols  are : — 


T  Aries     v 
^    Taurus)   Northern 
n   Gemini'       Signs 
®  Cancer    Spring  and 
Si  Leo  Summer 

iiR  Virgo     ' 


B.     =^  Libra  . 

tiX  Scorpio    *    I     Southern 
t    Sagittarius  |^       Signs 
y^  Capricorn    /  Autumn  and 
ccc  Aquarius  Winter 

K   Pisces  ^ 

N.B.— The  Signs  are  not  bodies,  but  spaces  of  thirty  degrees 
each,  and  divide  the  Ecliptic,  or  apparent  track  of  the  planets  round 
the  earth,  into  twelve  equal  parts  ;  and  the  measurement  of  both  this 
Circle  and  the  Equator  begins  when  they  cross  each  other  as  the  Sun 
ascends  northward  ;  consequently  we  measure  the  distance  from  that 
point  (called  the  Vernal  Equinox,  or  first  point  of  Aries)  on  the 
Ecliptic,  and  call  it  Longitude.  If  a  Star  be  a  little  North  or  South 
of  the  Ecliptic,  or  Sun's  apparent  track,  we  call  the  distance  from  the 
Ecliptic  Latitude.  The  Longitude  of  the  Stars  is  measured  by  signs 
and  degrees,  but  on  the  Equator  by  degrees  only,  which  is  called 
right  Ascension  ;  and  their  distance  from  the  Equator  is  called 
Declination. 

The  measurement  of  this  zone  or  belt  extending  22 J  degrees  on 
each  side  of  the  Ecliptic  called  the  zodiac  is  by  seconds,  minutes, 
degrees  and  signs  as  follows  : — 


60  Seconds 

(") 

I   Minute  (') 

60  Minutes 

I   Decree  C^) 

30  Degrees 

I  Sign 

60 

I  Sextant 

90 

I  Quadrant  or  Right  Angle 

60 

I  Circle  or  Circumference 

The  Sun  appears  to  enter  the  various  signs  of  the  zodiac  on  the 
dates  given  in  the  following  table,  which  should  be  committed  to 
memory. 

Sign  Sun  appears  to  Enter  and  Leaves 


V  Aries,  the  Ram 

8    Taurus,  the  Hull 

n    Gemini,  the  Twins 

®   Cancer,  the  Crab 

Si   Leo,  the  Lion 

ni?   Virgo,  the  Virgin 

:^   Libra,  the  Balance 

111  Scorpio,  the  Scorpion    - 

f    Sagittarius,  the  Archer 

Irf  Capricornus,  the  Goat 

-sr  Aquarius,  the  Water-bearer 

K    Pisces,  the  Fishes 


March  21 

April 

20 

May 

21 

June 

21 

July 

22 

Aug. 

23 

Sept. 

23 

Oct. 

23 

Nov. 

20 

Dec. 

21 

]an. 

20 

Feb. 

19 

April  19  J 
May  20, 
June  21 
July  22  » 
Aug.  23 
Sept.  23' 
Oct.  23) 
Nov.  22  ' 
Dec.    21 ' 

ian.      20) 
eh,      19, 
March  2i  ^ 


Spring 
Signs 

Summer 
Signs 

Autumn 
Signs 

Winter 
Signs 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL  9 

CHAPTER  III. 
The  Sun  and  the  Zodiac 

The  Sun  is  the  centre  of  all  life,  force  or  energy,  and  represents 
the  Positive  and  primal  fount  of  all  existence.  In  the  Sun  are  con- 
tained all  the  colours  of  the  solar  spectrum.  Every  form  of  existence 
manifesting  in  the  solar  system  is  bathed  in  the  solar  rays,  from  which 
is  drawn  the  life  that  is  at  the  centre  of  its  existence,  all  of  which 
may  be  summed  up  in  the  term  "  Positive  Life." 

The  Moon  represents  the  Negative  influence,  her  light  being  that 
which  is  borrowed  from  the  Sun,  having  no  light  of  her  own,  except 
that  which  she  collects  as  a  reflector. 

These  two  great  principles  of  positive  and  negative  are  symbols 
of  the  spirit  and  soul ;  the  father  and  mother.  The  former  is  the 
constructive,  energising,  and  creative  principle,  the  latter  the  preserv- 
ing, moulding,  and  formative  condition.  The  Sun  is  the  root  of  all 
things  in  manifestation,  without  the  Sun  there  would  be  no  life,  light, 
heat  or  motion  in  the  physical  world.  In  occultism  the  Sun  is  known 
as  the  vehicle  or  body  of  the  Logos  of  the  solar  system,  therefore  as 
the  highest  physical  and  mental  influence  that  we  can  know,  while 
using  our  brain  consciousness  as  a  means  of  cognition. 

There  is  but  one  life,  and  that  the  life  of  the  Logos.  We,  as 
units,  are  bathed  in  that  one  life.  **  In  Him  we  live  and  move,  and 
have  our  being."  The  planetary  spirits  and  the  planetary  bodies  have 
their  own  specialised  forms  of  this  one  life,  and,  humanity  in  its  turn, 
holds  this  life  in  a  separate  form  while  moving  in  the  great  whole. 
The  holding  of  this  life,  or  consciousness,  constitutes  the  individual, 
who  individualises  the  special  ray  of  the  great  All-consciousness,  and 
thus  knows  himself  as  I,  the  Ego.  It  is  this  specialisation  of  the 
rays  of  consciousness,  or  solar  life,  that  makes  the  individuality. 
This  work  of  building  up  the  individuality,  as  it  is  called,  has  taken 
vast  cycles  of  time  to  accomplish,  requiring  many  earth  lives  and  phy- 
sical embodiments  to  produce  the  wonderful  results  that  we  are 
familiar  with  to-day.  Potentially  we  are  sons  of  God,  a  spark  from 
the  great  flame,  sent  forth  from  the  bosom  of  the  Father  to  become 
like  unto  Him,  each  to  acquire  a  definite  self- consciousness  and  main- 
tain a  separate  centre  from  which  the  individual  creative  powers 
may  become  manifest.     When  this  great  truth  is  realised,  we  shall 


Digitized  by 


Google 


JO  ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 

understand  the  meaning  of  the  word  sacrifice,  and  turn  our  thoughts 
in  adoration  and  devotion  to  those  Great  Ones  who  have  guided  us  in 
this  grand  scheme  of  evolution  to  the  point  of  self-consciousness. 

The  Sun  may  stand  to  us  as  a  symbol  of  spirit,  and  the  Moon  as 
matter,  the  two  acting  in  unison  as  spirit-matter,  or  life  and  form.  It 
we  can  think  of  these  two  factors  as  positive  and  negative,  we  shall 
find  it  easier  to  understand  all  that  follows  with  regard  to  planetary 
influence,  as  it  is  called. 

The  one  great  power  and  central  principle  is  the  Sun,  and  all 
other  symbols  are  but  representatives  of  the  modifications  of  this 
universal  principle.  Each  planetary  system  will  be,  so  to  speak,  a 
modification  of  the  consciousness  of  the  logos.  Each  is  a  centre  of  life 
and  force  in  the  solar  system. 

The  zodiac,  as  explained  in  the  last  chapter,  is  divided  into  twelve 
equal  parts  called  signs  of  the  zodiac,  each  containing  thirty  degrees 
of  space.  It  is  in  reality  an  imaginary  circle  passing  round  the 
earth  in  the  plane  of  the  equator,  the  first  point  being  called  Aries  o°. 
These  twelve  signs  are  positive  and  negative  alternately,  i;i  their 
nature,  and  contain  a  certain  specialised  influence  of  their  own,  each 
having  a  lord  or  ruler  from  which  the  nature  of  its  influence  is  ob- 
tained. In  the  following  diagram  the  nature  of  these  signs  are 
indicated. 


Positive  Sign 

s. 

Negative  Signs. 

Aries 

T 

Taurus          b 

Gemini 

n 

Cancer          ob 

Leo 

SI 

Virgo            TTK 

Libra 

:^ 

Scorpio         TTi 

Sagittarius 

t 

Capricorn     Irf 

Aquarius 

*^M 

Pisces           K 

We  now  come  to  a  very  important  part  of  our  study,  in  which 
we  consider  the  Sun's  apparent  passage  through  the  twelve  signs  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  II 

the  lodiac,  caused  by  the  earth's  rotation  round  the  Sun.  From 
the  Sun's  position  each  month  we  may  judge  of  the  character 
of  each  individual,  and  we  shall  learn  that,  more  or  less,  each 
person  born  during  the  period  in  which  the  sun  passes  through 
a  particular  sign  of  the  zodiac  will  take  on  the  character- 
istics as  delineated  in  the  following  chapter.  This  will  in- 
dicate the  character  of  the  Individual  then  bom,  and  by  the 
same  rule  when  the  Moon  is  found  in  these  signs  at  birth  the  Person- 
ality will  be  described.  Later  on  we  shall  explain  the  planetary 
influence  in  each  sign,  and  also  extend  tfie  main  features  of  this 
chapter  into  greater  detail,  fully  explaining  the  above  diagram. 

CHAPTER  IV. 

The  Individual  and  Personal  Character  of  the  Sign  Aries 

T     March  loth  to  April  20th      T 

This  sign  governs  the  head  and  face,  hence  the  consciousness 
making  the  character  of  the  Aries  individual  will  always  express 
itself  through  the  head  ;  this  sign  is  the  head  of  the  fiery  triplicity,  and 
belongs  to  the  cardinal  signs.  We  find  persons  born  under  the  rule  of 
this  sign  always  looking  forward,  they  are  leaders  in  ideals  and 
pioneers  of  advanced  thought.  They  have  great  mental  energy  but 
are  inclined  to  be  very  headstrong  and  impulsive.  They  are  always 
prophetic,  and  love  to  predict  things  that  will  happen.  They 
can  look  ahead  into  the  future  and  foresee  things  with  remarkable 
clearness  of  vision.  When  freed  from  other  influences  and  not  slaves 
to  their  personality,  they  become  truly  clairvoyant,  and  are  remark- 
ably gifted  in  this  direction.  This  sign  gives  extreme  ideality,  and 
those  born  under  it  are  more  ideal  than  practical.  They  are  always 
full  of  new  schemes  and  plans,  ever  exploring  and  originating.  They 
are  fond  of  constant  change,  loving  novelty,  romance  and  specula- 
tion and  nearly  always  live  in  a  world  of  theory.  They  are  very 
highly  strung,  sometimes  hyper-sensitive  and  are  remarkable  for 
their  perception.  They  seem  to  live  more  in  the  perceptive  region  of 
their  brain  than  the  reflective,  and  they  are  rarely  deceived  where 
perception  is  concerned.  They  are  extremely  sensitive  persons,  with 
all  the  senses  fully  alive,  excepting  one ;  with  them  the  consciousness 
being  more   readily  expressed  in  the  head,   they  have  keen  sight, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


12  ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL 

sense,  taste  and  hearing,  but  from  the  fact  of  their  being  more  alive 
in  the  head  they  do  not  fed^  and  are  therefore  less  sensitive  to  touch 
in  other  parts  of  the  body.  They  are  very  self-willed  and  often  self- 
opinionated,  and  it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  restrain  them,  as  they 
are  always  inclined  to  act  upon  impulse  without  waiting  to  mature 
their  plans.  They  are  frank  and  outspoken  by  choice,  but  often  com- 
bative and  assertive.  They  are  generous  from  impulse,  and  are  fond 
of  reason  and  argument.  They  can  be  both  sceptical  and  credulous, 
but  the  former  mood  often  sways  them.  They  are  decidedly  lacking  in 
caution,  being  far  too  venturesome  and  often  running  to  great  ex- 
tremes, at  times  even  lacking  in  discretion,  but  never  in  zeal  and 
enthusiasm. 

They  are  ambitious  persons,  who  love  to  engage  in  great  enter- 
prises.    With  them  the  intellect  is  the  main  feature,  but  they  always 
find  it  difl&cult  to  understand  their  own  emotions  and  feelings.     They 
are  too  often  inclined  to  fly  oflf  at  tangents  and  will  rush  into  danger 
somewhat  recklessly.     When  not  living  up  to  the  highest  strength  of 
their   character,  they  have  a   tendency    to    jealousy,  they    expect 
loyalty  from    others    and   may    be  somewhat    exacting  in   this  re- 
spect.     When  fully  individualised,  these  persons  make  very  grand 
characters,  especially  in   all  pioneer  work,  their  enthusiasm  rarely 
being  daunted  by  obstacles.     When  their  mind  is  made  up  they  seek 
to  overcome  all  opposition,  more  by  their  dominant  will  and  masterful 
spirit  than  by  simple  perseverance.     They  are  interested  in  all  matters 
that  are  occult  and  metaphysical,  and  love  to  live  inja  world  of  theory  ; 
always  intellectual,   they  make  splendid  companions,  being  aflfable, 
genial  and  witty.     They  are  never  at  a  loss   for  a  word,  and   make 
excellent  conversationalists ;  as  a  host  or   hostess   they   are  full  of 
little  plans  for  making  those  around  them  happy,  aud  they  can  always 
be  relied  upon  to  provide  plenty  of  entertainment. 

They  love  harmonious  surroundings,  and,  possessing  artistic  tastes, 
they  generally  seek  to  make  their  environment  as  beautiful  as  possible. 
It  is  not  easy  to  deceive  those  born  during  the  period  of  this  sign's 
influences,  and  were  they  to  cultivate  their  clairvoyant  talent  they 
would  be  remarkable  for  their  powers  of  psychometry,  or  what  is 
generally  termed  intuition.  They  sense  others  in  a  remarkable  way, 
going  straight  to  the  core  with  those  in  whom  they  are  interested. 
Their  mental  sympathies  are  always  quick  to  respond  to  the  least 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  I3 

good  which  they  may  find  in  others.  They  are  sometimes  too  hopeful 
with  regard  to  their  enterprises,  and  generally  over-estimate. 
They  are  good  at  all  work  that  does  not  require  sustained  effort, 
and  where  things  are  required  quickly  and  promptly,  they  are  the 
people  who  can  do  them  best,  but  their  mission  in  life  is  to  inspire 
and  lead,  as  they  are  directors  and  promoters,  designers,  prophets 
and  teachers. 

The  head  being  the  most  sensitive  part  this  will  be  the  first  to 
give  out,  as  it  were ;  therefore,  when  the  health  fails  in  the  Aries 
person,  severe  headaches  result.  As  Aries  governs  the  face  also,  the 
eyes  suffer  when  the  system  is  depleted,  and  they  are  liable  to  suffer 
from  neuralgia.  This  being  the  head  of  the  cardinal  signs,  the 
stomach  and  kidneys  suffer  by  reflex  action.  It  is  essential  for  the 
physical  well-being  of  the  Aries  character  that  they  have  plenty  of 
fresh  air,  also  daily  exercise;  the  best  cure  for  all  their  physical 
ailments  is  peace,  quiet,  and  rest.  Amidst  harmonious  surroundings 
they  can  recuperate  and  recover  that  which  to  them  is  essential — 
balance. 

They  will  do  best  in  life  as  organisers,  leaders,  architects, 
designers,  company  promoters,  phrenologists,  character  readers, 
agents,  brokers,  appraisers,  auctioneers,  surveyors,  salesmen, 
detectives,  guides,  and  couriers,  travelling  companions,  house  and 
estate  agents,  inspectors,  foremen,  managers,  lecturers,  novelists, 
writers  of  short  stories,  photographers,  reformers,  elocutionists. 

The  Aries  types  would  marry  well  with  those  born  in  Sagittarius 
from  November  20th  to  December  20th,  provided  the  planetary  in- 
dications on  the  joint  horoscopes  were  harmonious,  but  the  Aries 
person  would  benefit  most  by  union  with  those  born  in  Leo  from 
July  20th  to  August  20th,  as  the  opportunity  would  then  be  offered 
of  joining  head  with  heart.  The  Leo's  being  more  practical  than  the 
Aries,  a  better  blend  would  be  obtained  from  this  union.  The  fiery 
and  airy  triplicities  being  in  sympathy,  it  is  out  of  these  the  best 
unions  will  arise,  the  Aries  person  would,  find  those  born  on  earth 
or  water  too  practical  or  too  emotional  to  suit  his  idealistic  tenden- 
cies. The  Aries  person  really  requires  to  unite  with  those  who  can 
draw  out  his  conjugality,  which  is  more  latent  in  this  sign  than  any 
of  the  others. 

We  may  sum  up  this  sign  of  the  zodiac,  which  governs  all  persons 


Digitized  by 


Google 


14  ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 

born  from  March  20th  to  April  20th,  as  belonging  to  the  intellectual 
trinity.  Their  aim  in  life  always  appears  to  be  to  live  in  the  mind 
and  intellect ;  this  makes  of  them  very  independent  characters  with 
clear  and  decided  ideas,  with  a  spirit  that  is  dauntless,  fearless  and 
aspiring.  Their  greatest  fault  when  perverting  their  gifts  is  deception, 
and  they  are  often  clever  enough  to  deceive  successfully ;  but  when 
strongly  individualised,  their  independence  enables  them  to  rise  above 
mean  and  petty  action,  and  their  pathway  is  always  on  the  road  to 
clear  thought,  which  finally  leads  to  the  perfected  intuition. 

CHAPTER  V. 

The  Individual  and  Personal  Character  of  the   Sign  Taurus 
«     April  2otk  to  May  20th     « 

This  sign  is  the  first  of  the  earthy  triplicity  and  the  first  of  the 
Jixed  signs,  and  in  this  sign  is  concealed  will  and  desire,  both  of  which 
express  themselves,  more  or  less,  in  the  character  of  the  Taureans. 
This  being  the  sign  of  solidity  it  makes  those  born  in  it  exceedingly 
solid,  practical,  and  substantial.  They  are  exactly  the  reverse  of  all 
that  has  been  said  in  the  foregoing  sign,  Aries  being  all  that  is  ideal- 
istic, while  Taurus  is  all  that  is  practical. 

The  Taureans  are  slow,  plodding,  patient,  enduring,  persistent, 
executive  and  matter-of-fact  persons.  They  are  remarkable  for  their 
conservatism,  and  they  never  seem  to  waste  their  forces  like  the 
Aries  types,  who  scatter  them  broadcast.  Persons  possessing  the 
strongest  wills  are  born  under  this  sign,  but  when  living  for  themselves 
exclusively,  they  become  as  obstinate  as  it  is  possible  for  them  to  be. 
They  can  be  very  determined,  persistent  and  dogmatic  ;  they  usually 
speak  with  a  quiet,  firm,  inflexible  and  almost  authoritative  tone. 
Possessing  a  considerable  amount  of  physical  vitality,  the  Taureans 
become  very  furious  and  violent  when  severely  angered,  but  as  they 
are  usually  slow,  careful  and  cautious,  it  takes  a  very  great  deal  to  excite 
them,  although  when  very  excited  they  stand  beside  themselves  with 
rage.  They  can  do  a  great  amount  of  good  by  their  steady,  building 
capacity,  being  capable  and  able  to  carry  out  all  plans  entrusted  to 
them. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  1 5 

They   have  perseverance,    are   steady,    patient   and    enduring. 

They  can  be  secretive  and  very  reserved,  but  make  faithful  friends 

to  all  whom  they  give  allegiance.     They  are  excellent  companions  to 

those  possessing  ideas,  and  as  co-workers  they  are  reliable,  sincere 

and  trustworthy.     They  always  seem  to  possess  a  great  amount  of 

stored-up  energy  which    makes    them    very  tenacious,  holding  on 

till  something  comes   to  set   them    free  or  liberate  their  stored-up 

forces. 

As  masseurs  and  healers   they  are   unequalled.     They  always 

benefit  persons  deficient  in  vitality,  having  the  power  to  magnetically 

heal  and  soothe  those  who-are  nervous  and  irritable. 

Schalater  is  an  illustration  of  what  we  mean.  This  wonderful 
person  healed  thousands  of  his  countrymen  and  obtained  a  world- 
wide reputation.  He  was  born  with  his  Sun  in  Taurus,  and  it  was 
said  of  him  that  he  had  only  to  magnetise  a  handkerchief,  or  any- 
thing that  he  touched,  to  enable  his  magnetism  to  be  felt  by 
others. 

The  mental  and  physical  vitality  of  the  Taureans  is  tremendous, 
and  persons  possessing  the  finest  physique  are  often  Born  under  this 
sign.  They  are  fearless  and  generous,  and  when  the  Venus  side  of  the 
sign  is  not  over  active  they  set  no  store  on  wealth  excepting  to  do 
good  with  it. 

When  they  concentrate  their  thoughts  they  have  immense  power, 
and  WILL  then  has  the  ascendancy  over  desire,  but  when  the  latter  is 
most  in  evidence  they  become  very  worldly  and .  incline  to  take 
pleasure  in  the  good  things  of  this  life,  being  fond  of  feasting  and 
comfort.  The  Taureans  make  the  best  psychic  mediums,  and  they 
may  be  contrasted  with  the  Aries  types  by  the  fact  that  they  are 
more  inclined  to  live  in  their  feelings  than  in  their  minds.  The  true 
Taurean  may  be  said  to  be  one  great,  feeling  individual,  but  as  the 
sign  belongs  to  the  earthy  triplicity,  it  is  more  often  physical  and 
objective  than  subjective  feeling.  Taurus  governs  the  neck,  and  as 
this  is  so  constituted  as  to  serve  the  head  which  turns  upon  it,  it  may 
be  said  that  they  make  better  servants  than  masters.  Being  trust- 
worthy they  make  excellent  public  servants  and  representatives  of 
governing  bodies,  and  they  are  often  chosen  by  the  public  as  officials, 
and  those  who  may  be  considered  the  people's  servants. 

Taurus  governs  the  throat,  hence  this  may  be  said  to  be  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


l6  ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 

most  sensitive  part  of  their  organism,  but  as  this  sign  is  the  first  of 
the  fixed  group  of  signs,  the  heart  is  often  affected  by  sympathy,  and, 
belonging  to  the  earthy  triplicity,  they  would  suflfer  from  dropsy 
afnd  tumorous  afflictions. 

The  throat,  however,  should  always  have  the  first  attention,  and 
exhaustion  through  speech  or  singing  should  be  avoided.  They  are  more 
inclined  to  suffer  through  too  much  physical  force  than  too  little,  and 
when  giving  way  to  what  is  sometimes  their  greatest  fault,  laziness, 
they  nurse  many  disorders  that  produce  rapid,  fatal  results.  When 
the  Venus  side  of  their  nature  is  in  excess,  they  are  liable  to  apoplexy 
and  sudden  death.  It  would  seem  as  though  they  were  benefited 
best  by  those  things  that  would  assist  the  Aries  types,  and  it  would 
be  better  for  them  to  exchange  magnetism  with  others  and  seek  to 
obtain  a  more  equal  distribution  of  the  life  forces.  They  often  pass 
out  of  their  bodies  earlier  than  it  would  be  expected  through  a  kind 
of  magnetic  stagnation,  and  if  they  were  to  energise  their  minds  a 
little  more,  and  live  less  in  the  feelings,  they  would  be  greatly  benefited 
in  health.  All  tendencies  to  become  morbid  should  at  once  be  dissi- 
pated, as  they  bring  a  desponding  and  melancholic  tendency. 

These  persons  have  the  ability  to  get  money  for  others,  and 
Taurus  being  the  second  sign  of  the  zodiac,  which  governs  finance, 
they  are  best  suited  for  all  professions  in  which  the  handling  of  much 
money  is  concerned.  They  would  therefore  make  good  bankers, 
stockbrokers,  treasurers,  cashiers  and  speculators.  When  living 
more  in  the  personal  element,  they  are  best  adapted  for  mechanical 
and  laborious  pursuits,  or  where  they  are  required  to  work  slowly, 
steadily  and  patiently.  They  are  good  at  all  executive  work,  but 
when  living  more  in  the  mind  than  the  body  they  are  excellent 
singers  and  sometimes  capable  actors.  They  would  also  succeed 
well  in  life  as  magnetic  healers,  doctors,  and  nurses,  also  in  all  agri- 
cultural pursuits,  such  as  farmers,  fruit-growers,  as  gardeners, 
builders,  etc.,  also  bill  discounters,  financial  agents,  book-binders, 
manufacturing  chemists,  compositors,  dressmakers,  florists,  French 
polishers,  house  painters  and  decorators,  japanners,  collectors,  insur- 
ance agents,  taxidermists,  etc. 

It  would  be  well  for  these  persons  to  marry  those  born  in  any  of 
the  other  earthy  or  watery  signs,  that  is,  so  far  as  mental  or  physical 
marriage  is  concerned. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  1 7 

We  may  say  of  the  Taureans  that  they  possess  more  vitality  than 
any  of  the  twelve  types,  and  they  appear  to  suffer  from  an  over- 
abundance of  life  rather  than  a  depletion  of  it.  The  words  **to 
him  that  hath  shall  be  given/*  seem  to  be  applicable  to  these  persons, 
and  it  is  quite  natural  for  them  to  be  reserved,  conservative  and 
secretive.  It  would  be  difficult,  without  a  knowledge  of  planetary 
configurations  at  the  time  of  their  birth,  to  say  whether  they  would 
be  dominated  by  will  or  desire.  Either  one  or  the  other  would 
tend  to  predominate,  but  in  all  cases  they  would  lean  more  to  the 
objective  and  concrete  than  the  subjective  and  ideal,  and  owing  to 
this  they  often  pass  through  a  period  of  materialistic  thought 
which  leaves  a  strong  impression  on  their  future  actions.  They 
appear  to  be  born  to  realise  the  practical  demonstration  of  the 
working  of  the  law. 

CHAPTER  VI. 

The  Individual  and  Personal  Character  of   the  Sign  Gemini 
n     May  20th  to  June  20th     n 

This  is  the  first  sign  of  the  airy  triplicity,  also  the  first  of  the 
mutable  signs.  The  airy  triplicity  governs  the  mental  conditions  of 
humanity,  hence  we  find  those  born  in  this  sign  living  more  in  the 
mind,  but,  owing  to  the  sign  belonging  to  the  mutable  group,  they 
are  dualistic — this  being  the  main  feature  of  the  mutable  signs,  and 
from  this  comes  the  tendency  to  express  two  conditions  and  an  incli- 
nation at  times  to  be  rather  easily  influenced  on  one  side  or  the  other. 
Gemini  governs  the  lungs,  also  the  hands  and  arms,  hence  it  may  be 
seen  that  one  hand  may  act  differently  to  the  other.  These  persons 
are  rarely  content  with  a  single  occupation  or  pursuit,  and  seem  to 
delight  in  having  two  things  in  hand  at  the  same  time.  They  can 
very  quickly  adapt  themselves  to  surroundings  or  environment  and 
they  are  remarkable  for  their  versatility,  but  they  are  very  sensitive 
and  have  the  ability  to  reason  upon  and  analyse  their  sensa- 
tions. They  love  change  and  diversity,  and  they  are  always  the 
best  persons  to  rely  upon  in  an  emergency,  as  they  can  instantly  re- 
spond to  the  requirements  of  the  moment.  They  love  variety  of 
thought  and  all  mental  pursuits,  and  these  they  sometimes  carry  into 
extremes ;  they  seem  to  take  an  especial  delight  in  leaving  their  work 

3 


Digitized  by 


Google 


1 8  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

unfinished.  They  will  take  up  one  thing,-  partly  finish  it,  and  then  go 
on  to  another,  which  they  also  feel  inclined  to  leave  unfinished  ;  there- 
fore their  best  work  is  done  when  co-operating  with  others,  and  when 
working  in  unity  with  those  who  understand  their  peculiarities 
they  are  capable  of  great  attainments  in  life,  but  the  spirit  of 
diversity  often  makes  them  experience  two  extremes  during  their  life. 
They  can  be  generous  and  also  somewhat  careful  and  near.  They, 
can  present  a  bold  front  and  assertive  attitude,  and  yet  be  timid  and 
highly  nervous.  They  are  conservative  and  progressive,  and  alto- 
gether quite  dualistic  subjects,  which  makes  them  difficult  for  others 
to  underst^iud. 

We  have  known  persons  born  in  this  sign  who  have  expressed  a 
desire  to  be  in  two  places  at  the  same  moment,  but  on  the  whole 
they  are  rather  impulsive,  and  this  generally  decides  the  line  they 
shall  take.       They  appear    to  be  unable  to    stand  any   worry    or 
anxiety,  which  quite  unnerves  them  ;  yet  when  left  alone  to  work  out 
their  own  designs,  in  accordance  with  their  own  peculiar  methods, 
they  can  do  a  great  amount  of  useful  work.     They  must,  however, 
first  realise    that  they  consist  of  many  compartments,  so  to  speak. 
When  they  change  their  times  for  working  and  thinking,  and,  in 
fact,  live  in    a  life   of  change,  they   can  succeed  very  well ;    they 
must  have  diversity  ;  this  may  make  them  appear  to  their  friends  very 
fickle  and  indecisive,  but  it  is  their  particular  way  of  working,  there- 
fore perfectly  legitimate  to  them.     Throughout  the  whole  of  their  life 
they  must  expect  dual  impressions  and  many  contradictory  states  of 
consciousness,  and  being  very  sensitive,  nervous,  and  highly-strung, 
they  should  try  to  analyse  the  particular  mood  they  happen  to  be  in, 
and  it  would  be  well  for  them  to  endeavour  not  to  be  swayed  by  the 
mental  thought-spheres  of   others.     They  are  somewhat  ambitious, 
but  it  is  more  a  mental  ambition  for  refinement  and  better  conditions. 
All  those  born  in  this  sign  possess  fine  organic  quality,  and  the 
ability  to  become  very  clever.  •  They  are  certainly  quick-witted  and 
mentally  impulsive,  and  they  seem  to  draw  a  great  deal  on  what  is 
really  an  inspirational  nature.     The  chief  characteristics  of  their  in- 
dividuality are  force  and  motive;    when  they  seek  to  discover  their 
motives  for  their  actions  they  may  be  considered  very  progressive, 
but  when  they  live  the   unbalanced  personal  life,  they  become  very 
diffusive,  indecisive  and  unreliable, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL  19 

The  sign  Gemini  governs  the  lungs,  arms,  hands,  and  the 
shoulders,  and  their  disease  or  ill-health  is  mostly  caused  by  excess  of 
activity  and  worry ;  this  brings  nervous  disorders,  which  belong  to 
the  airy  triplicity,  and  consumptive  tendencies  belonging  to  the 
mutable  signs,  therefore  their  concern  should  be  less  activity  and 
excitement,  and  a  freedom  from  all  anxiety  and  worry.  It  sometimes 
becomes  necessary  for  them  to  study  the  laws  of  hygiene  with  regard 
to  diet,  and  they  require  plenty  of  sleep. 

These  persons  succeed  best  in  all  work  where  the  hands  are 
employed ;  they  make  excellent  book-keepers,  clerks  and  commercial 
travellers ;  they  love  variety  of  employment  or  posts  where  the  mind 
can  be  engaged  in  two  avocations  at  the  same  time.  Their  best  outlet 
is  in  the  literary  world,  and  as  editors,  reporters  and  newspaper  men 
they  have  splendid  facilities.  They  also  have  the  ability  to  come 
in  touch  with  the  public  mind,  they  can  therefore  cater  well  for 
the  public  literary  taste.  Their  professions  should  be  accountants, 
solicitors,  attendants,  post  office  officials,  clerks,  decorative  artists, 
school -masters,  guides,  journalists,  lecturers,  milliners,  photogra- 
phers, postmen,  railway  employees,  secretaries  and  translators. 

These  persons  would  do  well  to  marry  those  born  in  the  airy  or 
fiery  triplicities. 

We  may  sum  up  the  Gemini  type  of  person  born  between  May 
20th  and  June  20th  as  dualistic  and  restless,  intellectual  and  sensa- 
tional, nervous  and  irritable ;  like  the  air,  to  which  triplicity  they 
belong,  they  must  ever  be  moving  from  place  to  place  or  thought  to 
thought.  Forming  as  they  do  the  last  of  the  intellectual  trinity, 
they  seem  to  be  able  to  express  the  two  foregoing  signs  in  themselves, 
and  if  we  were  to  think  of  Aries  as  the  father  and  Taurus  as  the 
mother,  Gemini  may  be  considered  as  the  child  of  these  twain.  In- 
deed, it  would  seem  as  if  they  were  ever  trying  to  blend  the  ideal 
with  the  practical,  the  life  with  the  form.  All  that  is  contained  in 
the  spirit-matter  of  the  positive  and  negative  union  of  Aries  with 
Taurus  is  seeking  an  expression  in  the  consciousness  of  Gemini. 
They  are,  as  it  were,  placed  between  two  poles,  and  are  ever  being 
called  upon  to  decide  towards  which  side  they  shall  lean.  The  ex- 
perience of  their  life  is  obtained  from  duality,  out  of  which  motive 
is  to  be  evolved,  ' 


^O- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


2Q  ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 

CHAPTER    VII. 

The  Individual  and  Personal  Character  of  the  sign  Cancer 

ffi     June  21  st  to  July  21st.     © 

The  sign  Cancer  begins  the  maternal  trinity.  It  is  the  first  of 
the  watery  triplicity  and  the  second  of  the  cardinal  signs.  This  sign 
governs  the  breast  and  stomach.  It  is  one  of  the  most  sensitive  signs 
of  the  zodiac,  and  belonging  as  it  does  to  the  maternal  trinity,  it 
governs  all  home  and  domestic  affairs  in  which  the  feelings  play  a 
prominent  part.  Persons  born  in  this  sign  are  characterised  as  being 
slow  but  sure.  They  are  best  described  by  the  crab,  whose  tenacity 
is  proverbial ;  this  creature  moves  forward  by  going  backward,  and  it 
has  come  to  be  looked  upon  as  a  sign  of  retrogression.  The  main 
feature,  however,  of  this  sign  is  the  power  of  retentive  memory.  The 
Cancer  individual  has  the  most  remarkable  memory  of  any  given  by 
the  twelve  signs,  and  it  is  no  difficulty  for  them  to  recall  minute 
incidents  of  the  past.  This  makes  them  somewhat  antiquated,  as 
they  love  to  dwell  on  past  events,  or  to  go  over  in  their  memory 
through  past  occurrences,  and  through  this  they  often  become  some- 
what limited  and  hindered,  particularly  where  attachment  to  family 
is  prominent  in  the  life.  Their  highly  sensitive  nature  makes 
them  feel  very  keenly  everything  that  affects  the  other  members 
of  the  family,  and  for  them  domestic  affairs  become  a  kind  of  brake 
on  their  own  individual  progress.  They  are  rather  approbative, 
love  to  be  approved  of,  and  always  yearn  for  the  sympathy  of 
others.  They  are  very  timid,  reserved,  and  shy,  and  fear  ridicule 
or  disapproval  very  much,  and  this  makes  them  somewhat  con- 
ventional, with  a  great  dread  and  fear  of  public  opinion.  This 
binds  them  to  clan  or  sect  and  makes  them  studious  of  **  Caste." 
When  attached  to  the  Catholic  faith  they  are  very  sincere  and  earnest 
ill  all  ritualistic  observances.  They  are  also  fond  of  banding  together 
into  sects,  and  when  moving  along  the  higher  lines  of  conventionality, 
men  become  freemasons  and  members  of  occult  and  secret  communi- 
ties, and  women  are  drawn  to  mystical  and  occult  meetings.  When 
fully  individualised  these  persons  are  remarkable  for  their  imagination, 
Lut  when  running  to  the  personal  side  of  their  life  they  become 
very  fanciful,  romantic,  superstitious,  and  fond  of  the  unseen.  From 
Sensation  they  work  through  feehng  to  the  highest  emotional,  and  it 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL  21 

becomes  very  difficult  to  find  harmonious  persons  born  in  this  sign  ; 
on  the  side  of  feeling  they  are  truly  wonderful  people,  but  this  feel- 
ing may  carry  them  into  the  worst  forms  of  sensationalism  or  upward 
into  the  plane  of  the  emotions.  Being  exceedingly  Fensitive,  their 
feelings  are  very  easily  wounded.  They  possess  a  psychic  gift  in  their 
feelings,  being  able  easily  to  feel  the  impressions  around  them.  They 
are  economical  and  very  fond  of  saving,  which  trait  runs  into  almost 
all  the  details  of  their  life,  as  they  are  very  fond  of  saving  letters, 
books,  and  all  kinds  of  cUrios.  They  hoard  up  curios  to  a  remarkable 
extent,  being  fond  of  all  that  is  antique  and  connected  with  age  and 
the  past.  They  can  become  very  conservative  and  certainly  respect 
age  and  custom.  They  are  persistent  and  exceedingly  tenacious ;  they 
are  apt,  however,  to  live  more  in  the  personal  side  of  their  nature  than 
is  good  for  their  well-being  and  that  of  those  around  them,  but  they 
possess  a  certain  amount  of  tact,  which  assists  them  considerably. 
When  fully  individuahsed  these  persons  possess  a  great  love  of  power, 
and  once  having  gained  it  they  seem  to  have  the  ability  to  hold 
it.  They  are  not  so  ambitious  as  they  are  lovers  of  fame  and  public 
recognition,  and  this  they  desire,  as  they  seek  a  world-wide  approval. 
They  can  rake  up  from  the  past  things  that  others  have  long  forgotten. 
When  acfing  along  personal  lines  only  they  are  inactive  and  inclined 
to  be  indolent  and  somewhat  grasping. 

As  this  sign  governs  the  stomach,  this  organ  will  be  a  sensitive 
part  of  the  system,  and  when  the  personal  element  is  strong,  we  shall 
find  these  persons  suflfering  from  weak  digestion  and  gastric  troubles. 
They  require  to  be  careful  in  diet,  there  being  a  tendency  to  suffer 
from  fermentation  in  the  stomach.  Worry  and  anxiety  with  them  are 
frequent  causes  of  indigestion,  which  produces  a  defective  circulation, 
and  brings  in  its  train  constipation,  congestion,  rheumatism  and 
chronic  disorders.  They  are  liable  to  suffer  from  fancied  ailments, 
and  to  become  hypochondriac. 

They  are  always  nervous  when  ailing,  and  generally  fear  the 
worst  results  of  any  functional  disorders,  and  in  this  respect  they 
become  so  morbid  that  they  actually  produce  the  illness  they  imagine 
themselves  suffering  from. 

Their  cure  is  a  healthy  imagination  and  freedom  from  all  anxiety, 
especially  with  regard  to  domestic  affairs. 

A  Cancer  person  is  best  adapted  in  life  to  those  pursuits  which 


Digitized  by 


Google 


22  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

embrace  the  catering  for  the  masses,  and  he  should  be  engaged  in 
professions  in  which  the  general  public  are  largely  concerned.  They 
make  splendid  historians,  being  able  to  write  up  the  past  with  a  com- 
parative accuracy.  As  the  Aries  types  would  do  well  as  leaders  in  the 
military  world,  as  captains,  generals,  etc.,  so  will  the  Cancer  types 
do  well  as  naval  captains  and  in  all  professions  connected  with  the 
sea.  They  make  good  nurses,  caterers  and  hotel  keepers,  barmaids, 
confectioners,  actors  and  actresses,  companions,  cooks,  laundresses, 
dealers  in  second-hand  clothing,  second-hand  booksellers,  dress- 
makers, matrons,  midwives,  mineral  water  manufacturers,  researchers, 
stewardesses,  and  succeed  best  in  all  matters  of  a  fluctuating  and 
public  nature,  in  commodities  that  change  hands  often,  and  in 
matters  of  small  profits  and  quick  returns. 

In  summarising  the  character  of  the  Cancer  portion  of  humanity > 
we  may  best  illustrate  the  character  of  this  type  by  observing  that 
they  are  seeking  to  become  perfectly  individualised,  and  for  this 
purpose  tenacity  is  one  of  their  chief  characteristics.  They  are  very 
reserved  and  sensitive,  sympathetic  and  tenacious,  persistent  and 
impatient,  impressionable  and  emotional.  It  is  necessary  for  them 
to  become  at  times  what  the  world  calls  selfish  that  they  may  pro- 
tect their  individuality,  but  when  this  has  been  attained  they  are 
self-possessed,  self-reliant  and  strong  characters,  in  which  power 
becomes  the  marked  feature.  This  sign  completes  the  first  four  signs 
in  the  zodiac,  in  which  the  four  triplicities,  fire,  earth,  air  and  water, 
co-mingle,  as  it  were ;  it  is  symbolic  of  the  film  or  auric  egg  that 
contains  the  whole. 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

The  Individual  and -Personal  Character  of  the  Sign  Leo 
Si    July  21  st  to  August  2otk     SI 

Leo  is  the  middle  sign  of  the  maternal  trinity,  the  second  of  the 
fiery  triplicity,  and  also  the  second  of  the  fixed  signs,  therefore  it  may 
be  said  to  hold  the  central  point  in  the  zodiac,  and  when  joined  with  the 
next  sign  it  certainly  contains  the  essence  of  the  whole  twelve  signs. 
Leo  governs  the  heart,  therefore  it  will  be  from  this  centre  that  the 
character  of  those  born  in  this  sign  must  be  judged. 

Standing,  as  this  sign  does,  in  the  centre,  we  shall  sometimes  find 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  23 

the  forces  of  the  heart  running  upward  or  downward,  but  only 
in  those  who  are  fully  individualised,  or,  as  it  is  termed,  self-conscious, 
shall  we  find  the  consciousness  centred  in  the  heart ;  generally 
speaking,  the  emotions  are  fully  active  in  the  Leo  characters.  They 
are  forceful  and  highly  magnetic,  and  possessing  an  abundance 
of  vitality,  they  carry  with  them  an  aura  that  is  beneficial 
to  all.  They  are  genuinely  kind,  warm-hearted  and  loving,  but 
usually  like  to  express  their  love  in  action,  their  emotional  nature 
being  deep  and  of  the  heart.  They  can  be  impulsive  and  diffusive, 
but  it  is  usually  the  impulse  of  a  generous  nature.  They  possess  a 
very  attractive  individuality  and  are  always  decided  characters. 
They  are  usually  very  practical  with  regard  to  their  ideals,  as  they 
prefer  to  live  them  rather  than  talk  of  them.  While  the  Aries  nature 
usually  spins  wonderful  ideals  in  thought  and  ever  seems  to  be  strain- 
ing after  the  unattainable,  the  Leo  types  are  silently  and  quietly 
seeking  to  make  them  realities.  This  comes  from  their  wonderful 
faith,  which  they  inherently  possess,  and  their  motto  is  generally, 
**  Whatever  is,  must  be  best,"  but  this  comes  when  the  Leo  nature  is 
awakened  and  the  desire  has  been  sent  out  to  unify  the  individual 
will  with  the  Supreme  Will.  Being  the  centre  of  the  fiery  triplicity 
they  possess  a  very  strong  love  nature,  which  makes  them  very  ardent 
and  sincere  in  their  affections.  As  the  second  of  the  fixed  signs  they 
have  more  unity  of  will  and  desire,  and  in  contrast  with  the  Taureans, 
act  more  on  the  side  of  will  than  that  of  desire.  The  Leos  love  to 
rule,  but  it  is  more  from  the  heart  and  motive  than  from  the  head. 
They  are  philanthropic  and  always  obey  the  impulses  of  the  heart 
where  sympathy  is  concerned.  This  sign  produces  individuals  who 
are  more  thorough  than  any  of  the  other  signs,  and  they  seem  to 
combine  the  practical  with  the  philosophical  and  the  ideal  with  the 
real.  When  self- controlled  they  are  wonderful  individuals,  being 
able  to  influence  great  numbers.  They  have  the  power  to  send  their 
thoughts  to  any  distance,  and  when  conserving  their  energies,  heal 
through  sympathy.  They  seem  to  radiate  from  their  centre  a  beauti- 
ful warmth  like  the  Sun,  which  is  ruler  of  their  sign.  But  when 
turning  their  forces  do>vnward  and  living  to  the  personal  side  of  life 
they  are  very  amative,  with  very  strong  passions.  It  is  sometimes 
found  that  the  weakest  and  the  strongest  individuals  come  out  of  this 
sign.     The  weakest  are  those  who  are  easily  led  through  their  feel- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


24  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

ings,  which  is  often  caused  by  associating  with  those  who  take 
advantage  of  their  Leo  nature  ;  they  then  fall  into  dissipation  and  may 
become  dissolute  characters,  but  within,  the  true  spiritual  fire  is  ever 
burning,  and  phoenix-like  they  rise  out  of  the  dead  ashes  of  them- 
selves to  greater  and  nobler  things.  This  sign  is  known  by  astro- 
logers as  the  house  of  the  Sun,  and  it  is  through  this  sign  that  the 
rays  of  the  Sun  become  more  powerful  and  more  fully  charged  with 
potent  life  and  energy.  When  these  persons  seek  to  become  self- 
conscious  they  seem  to  make  more  rapid  strides  in  this  direction  than 
those  born  under  other  signs,  and  possessing  as  they  do  such  very 
sensitive  natures,  they  are  able  to  readily  respond  to  spiritual 
infiuences ;  their  faith  then  becomes  marvellous,  and  the  whole  of 
iheir  life  seems  to  be  devoted  to  doing  good  to  others. 

Leo  governing  the  heart,  causes  this  part  of  the  system  to  be  the 
centre,  most  easily  affected  when  the  character  is  inharmonious  and 
the  life  running  to  discord  and  disorder  instead  of  peace  and  progress ; 
they  then  suffer  through  the  circulation,  \vhich  sets  up  many  troubles 
of  a  more  or  less  feverish  nature,  and  this  in  turn  reacts  upon  the  mind, 
bringing  gloom  and  despondency.  It  is  essential  for  the  well-being 
and  perfect  health  of  all  Leo  persons  that  they  have  a  certain  time, 
if  only  a  few  minutes  each  day,  when  they  can  be  quite  alone  and  at 
perfect  rest.  This  enables  them  to  start  the  machinery  from  the 
heart  at  an  even  and  harmonious  rate  of  vibration.  Their  best 
medicine  is  love,  peace,  and  harmony. 

All  Leo  persons  succeed  best  where  they  have  authority,  or  hold 
some  high  and  responsible  position,  but  in  trades  or  professions  they 
will  do  best  as  jewellers  or  goldsmiths,  as  writers  of  love  stories  or 
dramatic  sketches.  They  would  also  make  excellent  musicians  and 
poets.  Although  they  possess  great  strength  and  vitality  they  are 
not  fond  of  laborious  work,  and  they  can  only  be  really  happy  in 
positions  of  trust  and  management. 

We  may  sum  up  the  Leo  person  as  a  firm  and  self-controlling 
individual  and  one  who  is  ever  aiming  at  high  and  noble  things.  They 
are  all  born  with  a  nobihty  of  character  which  can  only  be  counter- 
acted by  contradictory  planetary  influences. 

They  are  generous  to  a  fault,  faithful,  sincere  and  earnest,  and 
although  somewhat  ambitious  and  persevering  it  is  nearly  always 
turned  in  the  direction  pf  self-perfection.     This  sign  gives  the  in- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  25 

tuitions  of  the  heart;  and  as  the  centre  of  the  maternal  trinity  it  holds 
and  binds  all  the  others  by  the  power  of  love. 

CHAPTER   IX. 

Thb    Individual  and  Personal  Character  of   the   Sign  Virgo 
ntjfi    August  2ist  to  September  20th    njt 

The  sign  Virgo  is  the  second  of  the  earthy  triplicity,  the  second 
of  the  mutable  signs,  and  the  turning-point  from  the  northern  to  the 
southern  signs.  This  sign  is  specially  characterised  for  its  self-con- 
taining qualities  ;  it  is  out  of  this  sign  that  wisdom  is  to  be  born  for 
the  majority  of  individualities.  Belonging  to  the  earthy  triplicity,  we 
might  suppose  that  too  much  of  the  earthy  element  would  come  into 
their  make  up,  but  this  sign  represents  the  virgin  soil,  the  spirit- 
matter,  as  it  were,  which  yields  the  most  readily  to  the  vibrations 
passing  through  it  from  the  other  signs.  The  individuals  born  in 
this  sign  are  constructive  and  able  to  make  the  most  of  their  condi- 
tions ;  they  are  more  generally  found  in  the  business  world,  particu- 
larly in  pursuits  which  provide  for  the  general  welfare  of  the  whole 
of  the  community.  As  characters  they  are  philosophical,  and  nearly 
always  seem  to  blend  the  ideal  with  the  practical  in  a  marvellous  man- 
ner, this  makes  them  very  discriminative,  giving  them  large  reasoning 
powers  and  very  ingenious  methods  of  working.  They  are  the  most 
critical  of  all  individuals,  but  they  usually  turn  this  criticism  also 
upon  themselves.  They  are  self-analytical,  and  seem  to  be  always 
taking  themselves  to  pieces.  They  are  careful  and  cautious,  and 
usually  act  somewhat  methodically,  or  with  much  apparent  fore- 
thought. They  are  very  industrious,  persistent,  and  tend  more 
toward  the  practical  than  the  ideal.  They  are  usually  precise  in  de- 
tails, and  can  readily  put  right  any  errors  and  defects  in  their  own 
character,  but  they  are  also  extremely  sensitive,  not  from  a  sympa- 
thetic standpoint,  but  more  from  a  mental  attitude.  They  are  very 
introspective,  and  may  be  said  to  know  themselves  much  better  than 
those  bom  under  the  other  signs.  They  possess  that  keen  intellect 
which  comes  from  experience  more  than  from  education ;  they  have 
remarkable  tact  and  ingenuity,  but  they  are  usually  fully  aware  of  all 
their  attainments,  and  are  inclined  to  be  somewhat  proud  of  them. 
When  running  along  personal  lines,  these  persons  become  more  selfish 
than  those  of  the  other  signs,  since  they  are  always  alive  to  their  own 


Digitized  by 


Google 


26  ASTROLOGV    FOR  ALL 

interests ;  they  then  become  rather  materialistic,  and  tend  to  carry 
the  practical  too  far  into  scepticism  and  doubt,  while  they  expect 
from  others  what  they  are  not  willing  to  give  ;  they  then  seek  to  absorb 
all  the  good  things  in  lifie  for  themselves,  and  may  attain  great  worldly 
success,  as  they  possess  all  the  ability  to  enable  them  to  attain  their 
desired  altitude.  They  may  be  said  to  have  many  faults  when  running 
to  the  personal  side  of  their  nature ;  and  ihey  become  very  domineer- 
ing, using  their  good  intellectual  abilities  to  the  detriment  of  others, 
and  a  certain  hardness  takes  possession  of  them,  which  causes  them 
to  identify  themselves  almost  exclusively  with  the  external  world  ;  but 
when  living  more  in  their  individuality,  or  becoming  what  is  termed 
more  self-conscious,  they  are  really  very  splendid  characters,  becoming 
discriminative  and  wise,  and  often  possessing  the  power  to  psycho- 
metrise  and  sense  the  psychic  conditions  from  a  higher  standpoint. 
They  are  capable  of  making  wonderful  progress  in  spiritual  develop- 
ment and  usually  seek  to  Uve  the  most  chaste  lives,  becoming  like 
their  symbol,  a  virgin  in  purity.  This  sign  acts  to  the  maternal 
trinity  in  exactly  the  same  way  as  Gemini  acts  to  the  intellectual, 
seeking  to  express  in  itself  the  union  of  Cancer  and  Leo. 

Those  bom  in  this  sign  possess  great  recuperative  powers. 
They  are  rarely  sick  or  ill,  and  may  attribute  much,  if  not  all,  of  their 
ill-health  to  their  own  habits  of  life;  being  natural  students  of  the  laws 
of  hygiene,  they  know  how  to  live  properly.  They  should  always 
avoid  drugs  of  every  kind,  as,  being  very  sensitive  physically,  they 
readily  absorb  the  poisons  of  drugs  into  their  system,  which  speedily 
affect  their  circulation.  They  are  more  sensitive  to  the  vibrations 
around  them  than  persons  of  other  signs ;  they  feel  the  changes  in 
atmospheric  conditions  almost  directly  they  begin,  and  their  bodies  act 
like  barometers,  expressing  to  the  sensitive  soul  within  every  change 
that  takes  place  in  their  surroundings.  Their  best  medicine  for  all 
disease  is  to  be  alone  with  Nature  and  to  have  around  them  har- 
monious conditions.  They  may  do  well  to  study  diet  and  to  be  par- 
ticular with  regard  to  foods  and  the  magnetisms  surrounding  them. 

The  Virgo  type  may  be  summed  up  as  retiring,  ingenious, 
discriminative,  active  and  mercurial ;  they  always  seem  to  have 
their  wits  about  them,  and  are  generally  self-possessed  ;  they  seem, 
however,  to  be  capable  of  extremes  of  good  and  so-called  evil, 
being  much    smarter   than   the    majority  of   those  around   them ; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  2^ 

and  when  living  only  for  themselves  they  are  capable  of  outwitting 
others  for  the  sake  of  personal  gain,  but  they  generally  act  with  a  full 
consciousness  of  what  they  are  doing.  This  arises  from  their  inventive 
genius,  and  being  alive  to  all  the  advantages  and  disadvantages,  they 
can  so  readily  adapt  themselves  to  the  requirements  of  those  around 
them  that  they  make  excellent  entertainers  and  splendid  social  com- 
panions, and  when  they  succeed  in  letting  go  the  personal  element 
they  are  really  very  beautiful  characters. 

Persons  born  in  this  sign  can  readily  adapt  themselves  to  almost 
any  environment,  but  they  have  their  best  success  in  life  in  the 
business  world.  All  commercial  affairs  succeed  under  their  ingenious 
management.  They  are  good  providers,  and  do  remarkably  well  in 
all  matters  connected  with  food  stuffs.  They  are  natural  chemists, 
therefore  sutceed  in  all  matters  connected  with  chemistry.  They 
have  also  a  fondness  for  general  literature,  and  have  success  in  literary 
pursuits  from  author  to  printer.  They  make  excellent  agents,  and  in 
fact  are  quite  ready  to  follow  any  avocation  in  which  activity  and 
general  mental  ability  help  them  to  succeed  in  life ;  but  their  great- 
est success  is  to  be  found  more  in  the  business  than  the  professional 
world.  They  like  to  handle  solid  materials,  and  to  deal  in  mer- 
chandise allows  their  mental  discrimination  full  scope  for  all  its 
activities. 

CHAPTER  X. 

The  Individual  and  Personal  Character  of  the  Sign  Libra 
^  September  21st  to  October  20th  ss^ 
Libra,  the  sign  of  the  balance,  the  equalising  sign  of  the  zodiac, 
is  the  second  of  the  airy  triplicity,  and  the  third  of  the  cardinal  signs. 
The  individuality  of  this  sign  is  expressed  in  justice,  equilibrium, 
balance,  order  and  dispassionate  judgment.  Those  born  in  this  sign 
are  remarkable  for  their  powers  of  comparison  ;  they  seem  to  be  able 
to  weigh  and  balance  all  things  mentally,  as  though  they  were  in- 
spired. Extremes  may  be  found  in  this  sign  as  in  all  the  cardinal 
signs,  but  sooner  or  later  opportunities  come  into  the  life  to  take  an 
impartial  and  im passionate  view.  It  is  the  aim  of  the  individuality 
working  through  this  sign  to  seek  equilibrium,  and  this  causes  them 
to  love  harmony  so  much,  that  they  feel  exceedingly  sensitive  until 
the  whole  of  their,  organism  is  in  a  state  of  balance.    They  have 


Digitized  by 


Google 


28  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

always  a  kind  and  amiable  disposition,  expressing  the  Venus  side  of 
their  nature  more  than  any  other ;  this  makes  them  courteous,  agree- 
able and  very  pleasant  persons.  They  are  remarkable  for  their  per- 
ceptive faculties,  and  there  is  a  great  amount  of  inspiration  in  this 
sign,  so  that  sooner  or  l^ter  the  Libra  individuals  come  to  realise  that 
there  is  an  unseen  as  well  as  a  seen  world;  this  makes  them  remark- 
ably intuitive,  as  they  are  able  to  draw  from  both  sources.  These 
persons  possess  the  most  perfect  forms  produced  by  any  of  the  signs, 
through  which  their  soul  is  able  to  express  itself  better  than  through 
any  other  medium.  Each  of  these  signs  is  best  studied  by  knowing  its 
opposites,  and  in  Libra  we  get  the  balance  of  Aries,  which  makes  the 
spiritual  perceptions  the  keenest  and  the  most  manifest,  so  that  they 
seem  to  have  the  ability  of  getting  occult  knowledge  through  inner 
perception.  Their  psychic  gifts  are  obtained  from  the  thought-realms, 
and  not  from  the  emotional  planes,  and  this  enables  them,  when  fully 
individualised,  to  temperately  expound  the  hidden  knowledge  con- 
tained in  the  one  great  World -religion.  They  seem  to  accept  fate  in 
a  way  that  others  are  not  capable  of,  and  realise  the  justice  of  all 
things.  When  working  along  personal  lines  these  persons  live  more 
to  the  form-side  of  life;  they  then  become  exceedingly  approbative 
and  very  sensitive ;  they  are  rather  impatient  and  inclined  to  be 
somewhat  careless,  but  their  personal  faults  and  failings  are  such  as 
may  be  easily  forgiven,  as  they  are  usually  very  even-tempered  and 
amenable  to  the  good  influences  that  generally  surround  them. 

When  unbalanced,  these  persons  would  suffer  from  the  /com- 
plaints common  to  the  cardinal  signs.  The  reins  and  kidneys  would 
be'the  most  sensitive  parts  of  their  organism ;  their  best  medicine  would 
be  music,  harmony  and  retirement,  but  they  usually  possess  the 
intuition  exactly  how  to  bring  their  physical  conditions  into  a  state 
of  equilibrium. 

These  persons  would  do  best  in  life  as  overseers  or  in  positions 
of  refinement,  where  they  can  quietly  and  calmly  manage  affairs 
through  their  large  perceptives.  They  make  excellent  librarians  and 
secretaries.  They  would  also  be  good  stage  managers,  and  musical 
directors,  and  successful  in  any  profession  where  they  could  preserve 
harmony  or  bring  it  about  in  others.  They  would  be  proficient  in  all 
artistic  arrangements  and  would  succeed  as  decorators,  arrangers, 
housekeepers  and  such  like. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  29 

To  sum  up  the  individuaKty  of  the  Librians  we  may  consider 
them  as  inspirational  and  perceptive  characters,  always  leaningmore  to 
the  spiritual  side  of  life  than  the  purely  physical.  They  are  sensitive 
so  far  as  the  personality  is  concerned,  when  not  fully  self-conscious, 
but  they  are  always  just  and  generous.  Xbey  seem  to  be  ever  striving 
to  manifest^ that  which  must  be  attained  by  all  humanity — compassion. 
These  persons  possess  knowledge  which  seems  to  be  the  cream  of  all 
the  mental  characteristics  of  the  preceding  sign,  and  with  them  it 
may  be  said  that  the  balance  of  their  individuality  brings  them  into 
real  touch  with  the  highest  form  of  mind  that  we  have  any  concep- 
tion of,  which  can  only  be  expressed  as  a  refined  mental  condition 
which  is  not  dependent  upon  the  brain  for  its  physical  manifestation. 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Thb  Individual  and  Personal  Character  of  the  Sign  Scorpio 
nt     October  list  to  November  20th     v\ 

Scorpio  is  the  third  of  the  fixed  signs  and  the  second  or  middle 
of  the  watery  triplicity.  Its  symbol  is  known  as  the  scorpion,  whose 
sting  becomes  the  most  prominent  feature  in  evolving  through  this 
sign.  We  may  find  characters  born  in  this  sign  from  the  lowest  and 
most  degraded  to  the  highest  and  most  exalted,  and  in  this  sign 
there  appears  to  be  more  scope  for  extremes  of  character  than  in  any 
other.  The  Scorpio  character  is  somewhat  decided  and  unmistakable, 
being  rarely,  if  ever,  vacillating  or  fecible.  It  would  seem  as  though 
there  were  two  types,  the  evil  and  the  good,  evolving  within  this  sign. 
It  is  the  eighth  sign  of  the  zodiac  and  marks  the  higher  octave,  as  it 
were,  after  the  balance  has  been  turned.  It  would  seem  as  though 
the  worst  products  of  Scorpio  were  the  failures  from  the  preceding 
seven  signs,  whereas  the  strongly  individualised  types  would  be  those 
who  had  succeeded  in  learning  the  mystery  of  this  sign.  The  sting  of 
the  scorpion  must  be  extracted  before  real  progress  onward  through 
the  other  signs  can  be  successfully  accomplished.  When  living  the 
purely  personal  life,  living  only  for  the  self,  the  Scorpio  types  of 
humanity  are  very  uncompromising  and  exacting  beings,  and  their 
vindictiveness  and  fault-finding  tendencies  can  be  carried  to  abnormal 
degrees.  Lust  and  ignorance  mark  the  character  of  the  undeveloped 
Scorpio  nature. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


30  ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 

This  sign  governs  the  generative  system,  and  when  the  life  forces 
are  scattered  and  wasted  through  excesses  of  sensuality,  these  cha- 
racters become  like  devils,  working  mischief  far  and  wide,  regardless 
of  the  suffering  which  they  cause  to  others.  When  evil  they  are 
unmistakably  evil,  and  with  the  thoroughness  characteristic  of  the 
fixed  signs  they  plunge  into  sin  with  a  delight  that  those  born 
under  other  signs  are  incapable  of,  but  when  they  are  regenerate  or 
self-conscious,  they  may  reach  a  great  height  of  exaltation.  The 
generative  force  within  them  may  be  turned  into  psychical  faculty, 
the  "  vril  **  with  which  they  abound  is  turned  into  shrewdness  and 
penetration,  and  they  become  the  true  mystics  whose  awakening 
vision  quickly  senses  the  future  possibilities  that  lie  before  the  soul. 
They  become  gifted  with  what  is  called  second  sight,  or  clairvoyance, 
and  plunge  into  occultism  with  a  zeal  and  earnestness  that  is  un- 
equalled. Those  who  are  individualised  in  Scorpio  are  remarkable  for 
their  keen  judgment ;  they  can  criticise  perfectly  and  impartially,  and 
they  are  able  to  give  their  judgment  in  a  decisive  and  clear  manner. 
They  are  very  quick  in  thought,  and  can  at  once  see  the  purpose  and 
meaning  of  the  things  they  are  criticising.  When  awakened  there 
are  no  better  types  of  humanity  than  those  born  in  this  sign,  for  they 
then  realise  what  they  may  become;  but  when  unawakened  they 
criticise  for^the  sake  of  criticism,  and  thus  become  the  most  exacting 
and  undesirable  persons ;  when  running  along  the  lower  levels  they  are 
always  mixed  up  in  some  tragedy  or  disastrous  affair.  They  can  be 
very  jealous,  severe,  hard  and  cruel,  but  when  all  this  force  is  turned 
upward  and  the  passions  have  been  conquered  and  temperance 
learned,  they  are  a  benefit  to  others  through  the  great  magnetic  power 
they  have  for  healing.  A  great  deal  might  be  said  of  Scorpio  that 
would  be  extremely  difficult  for  the  majority  to  understand.  The  few 
that  are  awakened  alone  can  appreciate  the  wonderful  possibilities  of 
this  sign.  They  have  remarkable  powers  of  attachment  and  seem  to 
contain  in  themselves  the  silence  of  Pisces  and  the  tenacity  of  Cancer, 
Scorpio's  companion  watery  signs.  They  are  generally  marked  for 
their  very  dignified  manner,  and  though  always  affable  and  courteous, 
they  are  ready  at  any  moment  to  stand  upon  their  dignity.  They  can 
be  very  abrupt  and  brusque  when  they  wish,  but  they  are  always 
amenable  to  approval.  They  have  the  power  of  self-control  to  a 
very  considerable  extent,  even  to  the  power  of  controlling  the  whole  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  3 1 

their  sex  nature,  turning  it  into  the  highest  spiritual  development ; 
they  are  then  as  it  were  a  huge  engine  with  steam  up,  all  ready  to  start 
upon  a  very  long  journey,  but  these  persons  are  powerless  to  move  or 
make  any  progress  until  they  have  overcome  their  very  tiresome  and 
trying  personality. 

The  ill-health  of  the  persons  born  in  the  sign  Scorpio  arises  out  of 
the  nature  of  the  fixed  and  watery  signs,  which  gives  rise  to  inflamma- 
tory complaints.  They  suffer  from  peculiar  and  uncommon  disorders, 
which  usually  affect  them  in  some  secret  part.  They  are  liable  to 
gout  and  aff*ections  of  the  heart,  but  the  whole  of  their  disorders  may 
be  corrected  by  conserving  their  life  forces,  as  they  possess  unbounded 
vitality  and  the  power  of  recuperation  to  a  very  marked  degree. 

As  magnetic  healers  and  doctors  they  find  their  best  outlets  to 
gain  success.  They  have  a  peculiar  knowledge  of  chemicals  and 
succeed  as  dyers  and  chemists,  or  in  any  business  connected  with 
oils.  They  make  good  surgeons  and  dentists,  also  detectives,  and 
are  well  fitted  for  employment  where  nerve  and  pluck  are  required. 
When  living  in  the  personal  life  they  have  success  as  butchers,  smiths, 
and  those  who  work  in  metals.  They  possess  the  dramatic  ability 
common  to  the  fixed  signs. 

We  might  sum  up  those  persons  born  in  the  sign  Scorpio  as  very 
determined,  reserved,  tenacious  and  secretive.  They  are  firm  and 
somewhat  proud,  and  capable  of  unmistakable  traits  of  character 
that  cause  them  either  to  be  very  much  liked  or  very  much  disliked. 
Their  somewhat  suspicious  nature  causes  them  to  be  distrustful,  but 
amidst  all  their  apparent  evil  traits  of  character,  they  have  that  grit 
and  backbone  which  enables  them  to  make  higher  attainments  than 
those  born  in  the  other  signs.  The  wisdom  of  the  serpent  lies  con- 
cealed in  this  sign,  and  they  may  become  so  discreet,  wise  and 
prudent  as  to  possess  a  genius  that  is  extraordinary.  It  has  been 
said  **  the  greater  the  animal  the  greater  the  man,**  and  it  may  be  that 
in  the  animal  passions  there  lie  the  germs  of  the  spiritual  force, 
which,  when  sent  upwards,  may  achieve  great  and  mighty  things. 
That  which  seemed  latent  will  and  desire  in  the  sign  Taurus  becomes, 
in  this  sign,  expressed  energy.  The  Scorpio  man's  desires  are  potent 
and  charged  with  the  power  to  attain  the  object  of  his  desires,  but 
when  the  desires  are  subservient  to  the  will,  there  are  none  more 
powerful   or  determined.     As  stated,  more  could  be   said    on  this 

3 


Digitized  by 


Google 


J2  ASTROLOGY    FOR  ALL 

sign,  but  that  is  reserved  for  another  chapter ;  in  conclusion,  it  may 
be  said  of  them  that  they  have  reached  the  point  that  decides 
their  future  progress. 

CHAPTER  XII, 

The  Individual  and  Personal  Character  of  the  Sign 
Sagittarius 

f     November  21st  to  December  20th  •  f 

Sagittarius  is  the  sign  of  the  archer,  who  stands  ready  to  shoot 
from  his  bow  the  arrow  which  is  said  to  never  fail  in  hitting  the  mark, 
which  means  that  they  have  the  power  of  prophecy  for  their 
special  feature.  There  is  an  idea  of  freedom  conveyed  in  the  symbol 
of  the  archer,  and  of  these  individuals  it  may  be  said  that  they  always 
aim  for  the  highest.  If  we  can  judge  of  the  individualised  Scorpio 
character  now  standing  prepared  to  shoot  from  the  bow  his  self- 
generated  thoughts,  we  can  imagine  that  this  sign  will  fulfil 'all  the 
mysticism  contained  in  the  preceding  sign.  Sagittarius  is  the  last  of 
the  fiery  triplicity  and  the  third  of  the  mutable  signs ;  it  therefore 
represents  the  union  of  qualities  of  the  head  and  heart,  now  sent  upward 
in  devotion  to  the  Heart  of  all  things.  When  fully  individualised, 
those  born  in  this  sign  are  great  lovers  of  law  and  order.  They  are 
very  intuitive,  very  prophetic,  and  possess  the  power  of  sending  their 
thoughts  on  the  wireless  telegraph  to  any  distance  that  they  wish. 
The  seer  and  tfie  prophet  are  born  in  this  sign,  and  we  find  these 
individuals  to  be  the  most  self-confident  and  self-reliant  of  any  ot  the 
signs,  when  awakened.  They  are  always  looking  forward  with  a 
bright,  hopeful,  and  happy  disposition,  which  mak^es  them  full  of  hope 
and  full  of  joy  for  the  future.  They  know  intuitively  that  the  future 
state  is  far  better  than  any  that  have  preceded  it ;  thi$  lends  them  the 
power  of  inspiration,  which  makes  them  always  enterprising,  pro- 
gressive, and  prophetic.  They  seem  to  possess  one  thought  at  a  time 
and  that  thought  carries  them  on  to  the  goal  they  wish  to  reach. 
They  have  a  decisive  way  of  expressing  themselves  which  can.  never 
be  mistaken,  for  behind  it  is  the  intuition  that  knows.  It  may  be  said 
of  those  born  in  this  sign  that  their  failings  are  those  that  can  be  easily 
forgiven ;  the  worst  evils  have  been  left  for  the  sign  Scorpio  to  work 
out.     When  personal  they  may  be   very  personal;    they  are  then 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  ^2 

restless  and  inclined  to,be  .over-active,  yecy  highly  strung  and  nervous, 
with  a  tendency  to  become  petulant  and  irritable.  The  personal 
Sagittarian  is  a  blunt,  brusque,,  and  outspoken  character,  and  he 
may  become  very  exacting  and  somewhat  domineering.  When 
perverted  their  nature  is  exceedingly  rebellious,  never  willing  to 
submit  to  the  lea^t  restraint,  and  when  angered  they  know  just  where 
to  hiurt  their  victim,  which  arises  from  their  ability  to  sense  the 
weakest  spots  in  others  ;  then,  with  the  arrow,  fully  charged  with  hurt- 
ful speech,  they  know  ju§t  how  and  where  to  wound. 

There  are. very  few  at  our  present  stage  who  can  express  all  that 
lies  concealed  in  this  sign.  This  being  the  ninth  sign  of  the  zodiac, 
the  house  of  guru  or  teacher,  we  may  foresee  what  humanity  is  to 
become  by  a  knowledge  of  this  sign.  It  represents,  first,  science, 
then  philosophy,  and  finally  the  true  religion ;  and  we  find  the 
Sagittarians  leading  to  one^r  other  of  these  three  attributes. 

The  scientist  may  remain  experimenting  in  the  regions  of  science, 
quite  unconscious  of  the  philosophy  and  religion  that  are  ever 
close  to  him  ;  and  the  philosopher  may  go  on  philosophising  without 
attempting  to  turn  his  energies  into  devotion.  As  the  third  of  the 
mutable  signs,  we  may  at  our  present  stage  find  many  indecisive 
characters  born  in  this  sign,  who  are  quite  uninteresting  and  often 
very  indolent  persons.  We  may  .again  find  a  great  majority  led  on 
by  teachers  whom  they  are  content  to  allow  to  shoot  their  arrows 
for  them ;  but  the  awakened  Sagittarian  is  the  true  marksman  who 
shoots  his  own  arrows  from  his  own  bow  and  marks  out  in  thought 
the  ideal  that  he  himself  VkiU  seek  to  climb  to.  The  Sagittarians 
have  nearly  always  clear  mental  pictiires,  and  they  are  able 
to  image  that  which  they  wish  to  see.  It  is  the  sign  of  the 
future,  the  promise  of  a  coming  humanity,  whose  thoughts  will  no 
longer  ,be  scattered,  but  directed .  to  the  goal .  which  all  must 
reach. 

Sagittarius  being  a  mutable  s|gn,  and  having  sympathy  with 
Gemini,  its  opposite,  the  lungs  would  be  the  first  part  of  the  system 
to  show  signs  of  weakness  ;  but  this  would  be  produced  by  the  over- 
activity of  the  Sagittarian,  who  would  sqatter  his  forces  and  thus 
deplete  the  vitality.  Walking  exercise  will  always  be  the  best  for 
those  born  in  this  sign,  they  would  then  be  able  to  recuperate  and 
draw  into  themselves  the  vitality  needed,  but  in  this  they  should  be 


Digitized  by 


Google 


34  ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 

careful  not  to  over-exert  themselves.  Beinor  naturally  fond  of  sports 
and  all  outdoor  exercises,  they  usually  live  healthy  lives,  but  they  are 
more  liable  to  accidents  than  the  other  signs,  and  more  often  suffer 
in  this  way  than  from  disease. 

Born  in  the  fiery  triplicity,  in  common  with  the  fiery  signs,  they 
make  good  military  men  ;  we  might  think  of  the  Aries  as  the  common 
soldier,  Leo  as  the  captain,  and  Sagittarius  as  the  general  or  com- 
maAder.  The  common  soldier  would  rush  headlong  into  the  fight 
with  the  impulse  and  impetuosity  characteristic  of  his  nature; 
the  Leo  captain,  with,  his  determination  and  decision  and  practical 
thoroughness,  would  be  able  to  lead  and  direct  with  perfect  control ; 
while  the  Sagittarian  commander,  with  his  foresight  and  prevision,, 
could  command,  knowing  just  where  to  direct  the  energies  of  his 
forces.  The  Sagittarians  make  good  teachers,  clergymen,  law- 
yers, astronomers,  photographers,  designers,  inspectors,  equestrians, 
horse-dealers,  sportsmen  (professional  and  amateur),  and  advance- 
agents. 

To  sum  up  the  character  of  the  Sagittarian  individual,  we  may 
consider  him  as  an  introspective,  impressionable,  active  and  enter- 
prising person,  always  frank,  honest,  generous  and  sincere ;  loyal  to 
whomsoever  he  becomes  attached,  and  generally  wise  in  his  love  ex- 
pressions. Although  not  so  demonstrative  as  the  Aries,  or  as  steady 
and  fixed  as  the  Leo,  still  the  Sagittarian  is  expressive  in  his  feelings. 
The  Sagittarians  make  splendid  characters  when  allowed  perfect 
freedom.  Being  lovers  of  liberty,  they  can  recognise  the  law  of  order 
and  harmony ;  but  when  bound  or  placed  under  any  restraint,  they  be- 
come fretful,  irritable  and  rebellious,  and  it  is  then  difficult  to  restrain 
or  pacify  them.  They  will  never  willingly  hurt,  but  when  pushed  to 
extremes  are  inclined  to  say  much  more  than  they  mean.  They  always 
like  to  do  one  tiling  at  a  time,  and  are  in  this  quite  different  to 
their  opposite  sign,  which  seems  to  desire  to  leave  things  unfinished  ; 
but  not  so  the  Sagittarian,  who,  being  of  one  thought  and  one  mind, 
likes  to  accomplish  that  which  is  in  his  mind.  The  persons  born  in 
this  sign  may  reach  to  a  great  height  of  prophecy,  and  they  may 
make  great  attainments  in  the  world  on  spiritual  lines. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY  FOR  ALL  35 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

The  Individual  and  Personal  Character  of  the  Sign  Capricorn 
VtP     December  2ist  to  January  2otk     ^ 

Capricorn  is  the  last  of  the  cardinal  signs,  and  also  the  last  of 
the  earthy  triplicity  and  the  first  of  what  is  well  termed  the  serving 
trinity. 

This  is  the  tenth  sign  of  the  zodiac  and  the  completion  of  the 
circuit  from  Aries  to  Capricorn.  In  this  sign  is  contained  the  perfect 
number,  and  all  the  attributes  of  the  perfect  man  are  to  be  found  con- 
cealed in  this  sign,  which  in  a  few  words  is  conveyed  in  the  expression 
**  And  whosoever  will  be  chief  among  you  let  him  be  your  servant.** 
This  sign  represents  a  high  mountain  on  which  a  goat  is  seen  to  be 
steadily  climbing  towards  the  top ;  but  many  symbols  could  be  used  to 
pourtray  the  wonderful  power  that  is  concealed  in  this,  the  strongest 
of  all  the  signs.  If  we  were  to  trace  the  Sun  in  his  journey  from  the 
first  point  of  Aries  which  starts  the  spring,  until  the  sign  Capricorn 
was  reached,  and  with  it  consider  the  unfolding  of  the  life  forces  until 
maturity  was  reached,  we  should  have  in  Capricorn  a  consummation  of 
character  that  would  be  well-nigh  perfect.  The  Capricornians,  when 
individualised,  are  impartial,  just  and  accurate,  aiming  to  be  precise, 
exact  and  constant,  fulfilling  all  things  with  a  persistent,  persever- 
ing and  industrious  nature.  They  are  assiduous,  arduous  and  care- 
ful, zealous  and  diligent,  ever  enduring  with  a  calm,  earnest  patience, 
and  a  grave  reflective  demeanour. 

They  seem  to  have  brought  the  economy  of  Cancer  to  a  kind  of 
perfection,  and  they  know  how  to  be  frugal  and  thrifty  without  being 
mean;  when  fully  individualised  they  are  very  contemplative,  re- 
served, deep  and  profound.  They  are  always  independent  characters, 
possessing  a  quiet  self-reliance  and  determination,  and  when  living 
up  to  their  highest  ideal  are  the  true  servants  of  humanity ;  but 
when  not  awakened,  and  living  to  the  personal  side  of  their  nature, 
they  pass  through  the  extremes  of  all  these  virtues.  They  are  always 
more  or  less  self-conscious,  and  seem  to  know  the  state  of  conscious- 
ness they  are  in  more  readily  than  those  born  in  the  other  signs. 
When  personal  they  are  melancholic,  doubtful  and  sceptical,  and  in- 
clined to  be  very  indifferent  and  perverse ;  and  when  working  on  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


36  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

f  •      .    ,  • 

lower  levels  they  are  constantly  repining  and  expressing  a  heavy, 

morose,  cold  and  distant  nature,  so  that  their  despondency  and  gloom 
carry  them  into  an  obscurity  that  is  painful  to  themselves  and  all 
who  are  connected  with  them.  When  very  backward  in  their  de- 
velopment they  become  miserly,  avaricious,  deceptive  and  dishonour- 
able. Capricornian  individuals  are  capable  of  attaining  great 
heights,  as  they  possess  both  ambition  and  endurance,  and  with  their 
punctual  attention  to  details,  and  their  thrifty  and  acquisitive 
methods,  they  can  build  while  others  are  dreaming  of  the  work. 
They  make  the  most  of  all  their  opportunities,  and  being  self-reliant 
they  accomplish  their  ends. 

It  would  seem  as  though  all  the  ideals  conceived  of  in  the  pre- 
ceding sign  become  beautiful  crystals  when  manifesting  in  Capricorn. 
With  their  practical  conception  of  things,  they  know  how  to  produce 
in  the  concrete  the  ideal  that  is  in  their  minds. 

All  their  ill-health  appears  to  arise  from  despondency  and  melan- 
cholia, and  they  may  gradually  sink  into  a  morbid  condition  from 
which  spring  numerous  complaints  which  would  appear  to  have  their 
seat  in  the  smypatbetic  disarrangement  of  their  digestive  system.  Their 
counteracting  medicine  is  hope  and  cheerful  society,  and  a  change  of 
scenery  and  surroundings  becomes  essential  when  they  have  given 
way  to  their  greatest  enemy,  despondency. 

Many  of  those  born  in  the  sign  Capricorn  rise  in  life  through 
their  own  efforts  and  personal  merit ;  they  acquire  wealth  by  a  steady 
and  patient  industry.  Great  wealth  is  often  found  with  this  sign,  and 
some  of  the  greatest  aristocrats  have  been  born  between  the  above- 
mentioned  dates.  They  are  successful  in  all  land  and  building  specula- 
tions, and  are  best  adapted  for  general  and  practical  work  connected 
with  the  earth.  They  are  successful  in  agriculture  and  in  matters 
connected  with  the  soil.  They  have  great  ambitions  and  are  able  to 
undertake  very  large  contracts  with  success ;  and  the  pursuits  tney 
are  best  adapted  for  would  be  builders,  upholsterers,  designers  and 
decorators,  and  all  professions  of  a  scientific  nature.  They  make 
good  scientific  researchers  and  writers  ;  and  in  any  avocation  where 
steady  application  and  industry  are  required,  they  are  the  persons  to 
succeed.  Large  speculations,  elaborate  enterprises,  and  huge  under- 
takings, are  best  conducted  by  the  Capricornians. 

We  inay  sum  up  the  Character  of  the  persons  born  in  this  sign 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  37 

by  considering  them  as  truly  Satumian  individuals  ;  and  they  range 
from  all  that  is  icy-cold,  limited  and  barren,  up  to  the  calm,  cool, 
contemplative  meditator  on  things  divine.  A  great  number  of 
persons  born  in  this  sign  favour  a  concrete  or  ceremonial  religion. 
They  are  always,  more  or  less  ambitious,  and  in  some  way  or 
other  are  ever  seeking  to  display  their  independence.  Although 
some  qf  the  strongest  characters  are  born  in  this  sign  and  are  thus 
able  to  serve  the  world  to  advantage,  there  are  also  many  who  ape 
humility. 

In  studying  Capricorn  we  may  learn  much  from  the  nation  which 
is  said  to  be  chiefly  under  its  influence — the  Indian  race.  In  this 
country  we  find  great  learning,  great  wealth,  great  power,  and  great 
position  ;  but  we  have  also  great  servility  and,  amongst  the  lower 
castes,  a  cringing  humility  which  is  distressing  to  those  who  can 
realise  how  low  the  mighty  have  fallen.  In  common  with  the  earthy 
signs,  those  born  under  Capricorn  can  be  extremely  selfish  ;  but  their 
virtue  lies  in  patience,  contemplation  and  reflection. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

The  Individual  and  Personal  Character  of  the  Sign  Aquarius 

^    January  21st  to  February  20th     jxz 

Aquarius  is  the  last  of  the  airy  triplicity,  also  the  last  of  the 
fixed  signs  and  the  x:entre  of  the  serving  trinity.  Nothing  that  could 
be  said  of  this  sign  at  our  present  stage  of  evolution  could  possibly 
convey  the  idea  of  the  state  of  evolution  to  be  reached  when  the 
whole  of  humanity  advances  to  the  condition  of  this  sign.  Its  symbol 
is  the  man  commonly  known  as  the  water-bearer,  and  that  which  the 
perfected  man  will  be  in  the  concrete  or  the  objective  world  will  also  be 
attained  in  the  subjective  world  by  the  Aquarian.  If  we  combine  the 
fixed  nature  of  this  sign  with  the  airy  triplicity,  we  have  the  idea  of 
fixed  air,  from  which  we  may  deduce  the  fact  that  the  thoughts 
may  become  fixed  and  concentrated,  and  thus  become  the  real. 
Aquarian  individuals  are  determined,  patient,  quiet,  unobtrusive  and 
faithful.  They  have  the  power  of  concentrating  their  thoughts,  and 
are  generally  philosophic  and  scientific.  They  lead  toward  the  un- 
conventional, and  thus  become  excellent  reformers ;  they  have  bright 
and  clear  intellects,  and  persevere  patiently  with  all  their  pursuits. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


38  ASTROLOGY   FOR    ALL 

They  are  persons  one  feels  one  can  depend  upon,  and  they  inspire 
trust  by  their  equable  dispositions.  They  are  nearly  always  kind, 
humane  and  retiring.  They  are  exceedingly  fond  of  art,  music  and 
literature;  but  seem  to  have  more  ability  for  scientific  studies,  and 
in  this  they  are  helped  considerably  by  their  intuitive  and  penetrat- ' 
ing  ilature.  When  fully  individualised,  they  have  a  great  love  for  all 
humanitarian  undertakings  and  concerns  that  produce  harmony  for 
the  many  ;  this  gives  them  marked  social  tendencies,  and  makes 
them  delight  in  giving  pleasure  to  others.  They  possess  literary  and 
artistic  ability  above  the  average,  and  are  always  more  or  less  in- 
clined toward  the  occult  sciences.  They  make  splendid  researchers 
on  scientific  lines.  When  awakened,  they  are  patient  in  devotion^ 
and  careful  in  their  thought,  and  develop  excellent  memories  for 
subjective  ideas.  The  main  feature  of  this  sign  is  the  remarkable 
ability  that  it  gives  for  the  study  of  human  nature ;  the  Aqiiirian 
individuals  are  born  character-readers,  and  they  are  rarely  mistaken 
in  their  judgment.  They  seem  to  contain  the  essence  of  the  airy 
iriplicity  and  possess  a  mentality  of  the  highest  and  most  refined 
quality,  which  makes  them  natural  clairvoyants,  clear  reasoners, 
and  careful  students.  When  living  along  the  purely  personal  lines, 
they  are  somewhat  chaotic,  diffusive,  deceptive,  tricky  and  clever  for 
their  own  ends,  conceited,  somewhat  egotistical,  apt  to  use  their 
inflexible  wills  in  the  direction  of  selfish  mental  desires,  and  inclined 
to  be  vacillating  and  capricious,  often  boosting  of  things  they  cannot 
perform.  There  are  very  few  true  Aquarians  amongst  us  as  yet. 
Their  day  is,  however,  approaching,  and  we  may  catch  a  glimpse  of 
what  we  may  expect,  when  studying  the  lives  of  Dickens,  Edison, 
Ruskin,  and  George  Peabody  ;  in  the  clairvoyance  of  Swedenborg ; 
and  in  tne  science  of  Darwin;  all  of  whom  were  born  in  this  sign. 
We  may  thus  gain  some  idea  of  what  the  future  humanity  may  be. 

Defective  circulation  is  the  chief  cause  of  the  troubles  common 
to  the  Aquarians,  when  not  living  healthy  and  progressive  lives. 
They  have  more  mental  vitality,  as  it  were,  than  physical,  therefore 
exercise  and  fresh  air  is  their  finest  medicine.  Beautiful  scenery  and 
harmonious  surroundings,  and  the  concentration  of  their  thought  upon 
good  health  and  perfect  circulation,  will  do  much  to  benefit  them 
physically. 

The  Aquarians  succeed  best  in  life  in  all  pursuits  where  steady 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  39 

application  of  the  mind  and  the  concentration  of  thought  are  necessary  ; 
they  make  good  artists,  designers,  and  musicians.  They  have  inven- 
tive genius,  and  are  responsible  for  more  inventions  for  the  benefit  of 
humanity  than  any  of  the  other  signs.  They  would  have  success  in 
all  employments  connected  with  electricity,  or  as  writers,  or  in  con- 
nection with  railways. 

The  Aquarians  may  be  summed  up  as  honest,  steady,  discrimina- 
tive, and  truly  intelligent  individuals.  They  are  noted  for  the 
integrity  and  sincerity  they  possess ;  the  intense  and  fixed  love 
nature  of  the  fixed  signs  combined  wit^i  the  refined  mental  quality  of 
the  airy  signs.  They  are  faithful  in  their  love  until  the  end,  the  love 
generally  living  in  the  higher  mind.  They  succeed  in  life  where 
others  would  fail,  and  have  clear  conceptions  of  all  they  undertake. 
They  are  studious  and  thoughtful,  and  at  the  same  time  versatile. 
They  can  retain  whatever  knowledge  they  acquire,  and  are  dis- 
criminative enough  to  turn  all  their  forces  in  the  best  direction. 
They  are  acquisitive  without  being  miserly,  and  are  inclined  to  leave 
their  possessions  for  the  benefit  of  humanity.  They  seem  to  readily 
take  to  strangers,  and  rarely  consider  that  others  are  in  any  way 
strange  to  them,  and  through  their  excellent  ability  to  read  and 
judge  human  character  they  rarely  make  mistakes  in  their  estimate 
of  others.  They  all  possess  the  latent  ability  to  become  <*  the  Man  ** 
that  their  sign  symbolises,  and  when  they  have  united  their  grand 
mentality  with  their  polar  sign  Lreo,  in  which  is  contained  all  the 
feeliogs,  love,  and  emotions  of  the  heart,  they  are  then  able,  like  the 
water-^bearer,  to  pour  out  upon  the  earth  the  living  waters  of  life 
which  nourish  and  sustain  all  around  them.  Light  and  life  await 
those  who  break  away  from  the  personality  and  live  in  the 
individuality  of  this  sign. 

CHAPTER  XV. 

The  Individual  and  Personal  Character  of  the  Sign  Pisces 
X     February  21st  to  March  20th     H 

This  is  the  last  sign  of  the  zodiac,  the  sign  of  the  fishes.  It  is 
the  last  of  the  watery  and  mutable  signs.  Its  symbol  represents  two 
fishes  tied  together,  one  swimming  in  one  direction  and  the  other  in 
the  opposite.     Id  some  respects  this  sign  represents  the  failures  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


40  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

humanity,  and  for  this  reason  it  is  somewhat  difficult  to  express  all 
that  is  conveyed  in  the  symbol  of  this  sign. 

There  can  be  no  such  thing  as  a  real  failure ;  but  if  we  were 
to  think  of  a  progression  through  all  the  signs,  and  then  think  of  the 
sign  Pisces  as  representing,  on  the  one  hand,  those  who  had 
succeeded  in  extracting  the  virtue  from  each,  and,  on  the  other  hand, 
those  who  had  failed  to  accomplish,  we  might  obtain  some  idea  of 
what  is  meant  by  the  term  often  appHed  to  this  sign  of  **  self-undoing.*' 
We  do  get  apparent  failures  in  life  indicated  by  this  sign  ;  and  these 
are  the  persons  who  may  be  said  to  live  an  entirely  personal  life,  to 
the  total  exclusion  of  the  individual,  their  consciousness,  as  it  were, 
functioning  only  on  the  very  lowest  levels  of  manifested  life*.  They 
are  then  over-restless  and  over-anxious,  lacking  life  and  energy, 
apparently  undecided  how  to  act,  and  always  waiting  for  an 
opportunity.  It  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  interpret  this  sign  with  any 
degree  of  clearness,  for  not  one  in  fifty  born  in  it  will  ever 
admit  his  own  character.  They  nearly  always  pretend  to  be  some- 
thing different  from  what  they  really  are,  and  as  they  are  usually 
hampered  with  an  over-abundance  of  self-esteem  and  approbativeness 
combined,  it  becomes  very  difficult  for  them  to  admit  their  failings. 
A  considerable  amount  of  the  personal  Pisces  character  appears  to 
arise  from  a  lack  of  decision,  and  being  very  receptive  to  all  the 
conditions  that  are  around  them,  they  find  it  very  difficult  lo  become 
fully  individualised,  and  therefore  are  usually  a  bundle  of  incon- 
sistencies tied  with  the  cord  of  discontent.  There  are  more  mediums 
born  in  this  sign  than  in  all  the  others  put  together ;  in  fact,  they  are 
so  very  mediumisiic  that  they  rarely  know  themselves  from  other 
people,  and  are  ever  ready  to  attribute  their  failings  to  the  conditions 
that  are  around  them.  They  are  more  easily  obsessed  than  any  of 
the  other  types,  and  are  so  exceedingly  psychic  and  receptive  as  to 
draw  many,  spirits  around  them,  who  live  quite  peacefully  in  their 
floating  aura.  Possessing  very  strong  emotions  they  become  much 
attached  to  their  friends,  quietly  accepting'iheir  advice  and  opinion 
and  endeavouring  to  act  upon  it  whenever  it  is  convenient.  They 
are  very  changeable  and  imaginative,  or  probably,  what  is  more 
correct,  fanciful ;  and  love  to  Hve  in  a  world  of  romance.  They  are 
fond  of  sensational  novels,  and  greedily  devour  everything  of  an 
exciting   nature.       Some  of    the  worst    types  are   apt    to  take  to 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  4I 

drink  under  any  severe  anxiety  and  worry,  and  to  give  way  to  the 
worst  forms  of  temptation.  When  becoming  individualised  and 
more  self-controlled,  they  are  very  patient,  gentle  and  submissive 
persons,  possessing  a  quiet'  understanding ;  as  they  awaken  and 
unfold,  they  become  deeply  interested  in  occult  phenomena.  i 

Their  character,  as  it  grows,  becomes  more  confiding,  more 
trustful,  but  rarely  self-reliant ;  although  they  are  capable  of  being 
very  honest,  amiable,  loving  and  kind,  with  an  abundance  of  sym- 
pathy, especially  to  all  dumb  animals.  They  are  ever  apt  to  be 
more  timid  than  bold,  and  it  will  usually  be  found  that  where  self- 
esteem  is  lacking,  approbativeness  will  take  its  place,  and  vice  versa. 
It  is  essential  that  they  live  pure  and  clean  lives,  as  they  are  more  . 
magnetic  and  liable  to  absorb  evil  influences  than  any  of  the  other 
signs.  The  dualistic  nature  of  Pisces  makes  it  very  difficult  to  ex- 
tract the  good  from  that  which  appears  bad ;  they  love  roaming 
about;  are  sometimes  rather  fastidious  and  too  fond  of  detail; 
but  are,  however,  very  hospitable,  and  seek  to  do  all  in  their  power 
to  make  those  dependent  on  them  comfortable  and  happy.  As  ' 
caterers,  hotel  proprietors,  nurses  and  those  who  minister  to  the 
welfare  of  others  generally,  they  find  their  forte  in  life. 

The  Pisces  individuals  seem  to  be  more  liable  to  consumption 
than  the  other  mutable  signs ;  but  they  seem  to  cause  this  themselves, 
by  despondency  and  melancholia.  When  worried,  their  digestive 
conditions  are  disordered,  and  this  produces  many  other  troubles. 
Through  being  over-anxious  and  worrying  they  often  weaken  their 
system  and  suffer  from  functional  disorders.  To  preserve  their 
health  they  should  be  very  cleanly  in  their  habits,  avoiding  all  impure 
magnetisms  and  infectious  diseases. 

The  Piscurians  are  generally  fond  of  the  sea,  and  they  succeed 
best  in  life  in  all  pursuits  connected  with  the  sea,  or  water,  and  as  sea- 
captains  or  naval  men  they  are  in  their  right  vocation.  They  are 
good  travellers  and  advance  agents ;  they  make  good  novelists,  book- 
keepers and  accountants ;  and  are  successful  as  painters,  and  any 
employment  that  brings  some  kind  of  change,  or  where  attention  to 
details  is  necessary,  and  where  they  may  complete  the  work  of  others. 

It  would  be  difficult  to  find  the  word  that  would  express  the 
Pisces  individual,  excepting  it  be  that  they  are  excellent  mediums^ 
and  are  able  to  receive  some  of  the  impressions  coming  from  the  pre- 


Digitized  by 


Google 


4a  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

ceding  signs.  They  are  emotional  and  secretive,  patient  and  medita- 
tive, kind  and  generous,  imitative,  receptive,  and  peaceful  when 
living  up  to  the  best  of  their  nature.  They  seem  to  possess  a  pecu- 
liar understanding  of  their  own,  and  love  to  investigate  phenomena. 
They  are  nearly  all  more  or  less  drawn  to  spiritualism,  or  the  in- 
vestigation of  the  unseen.  If  it  be  true  that  they  come  under  the 
planet  Neptune,  which  is  supposed  to  govern  Pisces  to  a  consider- 
able extent,  then  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at  that  the  sign  is  difficult 
to  express ;  but  as  there  are  extremes  in  all  the  signs,  we  may  expect 
in  this,  as  in  the  others,  some  very  good,  and  also  some  weak 
characters. 

In  the  foregoing  chapters  the  nature  pf  the  Sun's  influence  while 
vitalizing  each  sign  of  the  Zodiac  has  been  given  for  each  of  the 
twelve  months  of  the  year,  and  the  same  delineations,  when  modified, 
will  also  give  a  description  of  the  personality  when  the  Moon  is  being 
carried  through  either  of  the  signs,  as  will  be  explained  in  the  suc- 
ceeding chapters. 

A  word  of  explanation  with  regard  to  the  term  Individuality  may 
be  necessary  to  those  who  have  not  yet  distinguished  between  the 
individual  part  of  man's  nature,  and  that  which  we  recognise  as  the 
personality.  The  Sun  represents  to  us  the  ptire  mind,  or  what  is 
termed  in  Sanscrit,  Manas.  It  is  the  human  portion,  as  distinct  from 
the  animal.  The  Personality,  as  represented  by  the  Moon,  is  what  is 
known  in  the  Eastern  Philosophy  as  Kama-Manas,  or  the  mind 
linked  with  desire,  generally  known  as  the  Animal-Man. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


'  ASTROLOGY  T0S.  ALL 


43 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

The  Nature  of  the  Twelve  Signs  of  the  ZopiAc 


1.  i 


We  may  now  examine  the  signs  of  the  zodiac  as  a  whole,  also  in 
various  divisions,  a  correct  knowledge  of  the  zpdiac  being  essential 
before  proceeding  further.  The  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac  play  a 
most  important  part  with  regard  to  the  delineation  of  nativities,  and 
unless  the  true  nature  of  each  sign  is  thoroughly  understood,  a  correct 
judgment  cannot  be  given  ;  therefore,  it  is  necessary  throughout  these 
lessons  to  study  the  twelve  signs  as  exhaustively  as  possible. 

It  is  impossible  to  understand  the  twelve  signs  as  one  whole, 
without  perfect  knowledge ;  but  we  may  know  a  great  deal  of  the 
whole  by  studying  the  signs  in  part.  Taken  in  their  entirety,  the 
signs  of  the  zodiac  represent :  firstly,  the  desire-nature,  composed  of 
the  feelings,  passions  and  emotions  of  the  world's  humanity  ;  secondly, 
the  whole  of  the  personal  consciousness  that  is  dependent  upon  the 
senses  for  its  experiences,  generally  spoken  of  as  common-sense. 

We  shall  begin  to  study  the  parts,  separating*  the  twelve  signs 
into  pairs  of  positive  and  negative  ;  then  into  four  groups,  known  as 
triplicities  ;  finally  into  three  distinct  divisions,  known  as  qualities, 
which  we  may  arrange  as  follows  : 


Digitized  by 


Google 


44 


ASTROLOGY  F(Jr  ALL 


Northern 

Signs 

Symbol : 

T 

» 

n 

Sign: 

Aries 

Taurus 

Gemini 

Triplicity : 

Fiery 

Earthy 

Airy 

Quality : 

Cardinal  , 

Fixed 

Mutable 

Pole: 

Positive 

Negative 

Positive 

Power : 

Cardinal 

Succeedent 

Cadent 

Character : 

Ram 

Bull 

Twins 

Parts  of  Body  : 

Head 

Throat 

Lungs 

No. 

I. 

II. 

HI. 

Symbol : 

® 

a 

nr 

Sign: 

Cancer 

Leo 

Viife 

Triplicity : 

Watery 

Fiery 

Earthy'    • 

Quality : 

Cardinal 

Fixed 

Mutable 

Pole: 

Negative 

Positive 

Negative 

Power  : 

Cardinal 

Succeedent 

Cadent 

Character : 

Crab 

Lion 

Virgin 

Parts  of  Body : 

Stomach 

Heart 

Bowels 

No. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

Southern 

Signs 

Symbol : 

=2r 

m 

f 

Sign ; 

Libra 

Scorpio 

Sagittarius 

Triplicity : 

Airy 

Watery 

Fiery 

Quality : 

Cardinal 

Fixed 

Mutable 

Pole: 

Positive 

Negative 

Positive 

Power : 

Cardinal 

Succeedent 

Cadent 

Character : 

Balance 

Scoirpion 

Archer 

Parts  of  Body : 

Reins 

Secrets 

Thighs 

No. 

.   VII. 

vin. 

IX. 

Symbol : 

b 

CSI 

X 

Sign: 

Capricorn 

Aquarius 

Pisces 

Triplicity 

Earthy 

Airy 

Watery 

Quality : 

Cardinal 

Fixed 

Mutable 

Pole: 

Negative 

Positive 

Negative 

Power : 

Cardinal 

Succeedent 

.     Cadent 

Character : 

Goat 

The  Man 

The  Fishes 

Parts  of  Body 

:     Knees 

Ankles 

Feet 

No. 

X. 

XL 

XIL 

Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  45 

Examining  the  signs  in  groups,  we  may  become  better  acquainted 
with  their  meaning,  until  we  are  finally  able  to  expand  our  know^ 
ledge  of  each  separate  sign  and  ascertain  its  true  value.  The 
grouping  of  these  two  divisions  will  now  assist  us. 

\Groups  of  Triplicitiis  Quality  of  Signs 

Fiery  Signs     T   SI    ^  Cardinal     <r   ®   ^  Vy 

Earthy     „        «    tijj  V:f  Fixed  «    SI  m  -555' 

Airy         ,,        n    ^  zs  Mutable      n    tiK    ^    K 
Watery    „       ®   Til   X 
We  may  now  discover  the  meaning  of  the  triplicities  by  separat- 
ing them  i    ^»  pairs,  as  follows : 

Posit' 'e    (     T       SI  t  Fiery  and   )The    ideal     and 

Group       I  Aries,  Leo,  Sagittarius  Ardent      )    intuitive  world 

Negative  J       nx  ffi  K  Watery  and )  The    astral    and 

Group       t  Scorpio,  Cancer,  Pisces         Plastic       (  psychic  world. 

The  fiery  signs  represent  energy,  force  and  life,  and  govern  the 
passions  and  higher  emotions,  the  highest  feelings  in  which  warmth 
and  activity  are  expressed.  They  have  a  tendency  to  expand,  burn 
up  and  refine  all  the  dross  out  of  the  nature,  and  expend  in  force  the 
best  part  of  the  emotions,  the  direction  of  the  energy  depending  upon 
the  strength  of  the  will  behind,  as  seen  by  the  planetary  indications. 

The  watery  signs  represent  the  receptive  part  of  the  nature 
which  is  inactive,  unless  moved  by  desire  or  impulse  from  without. 
They  govern  the  personal  feelings  and  sensitive  part  of  the  nature, 
and  in  undeveloped  types  sensation  is  needed  to  enable  those  under 
their  influence  to  realise  that  they  are  attached  to  their  personaUty ; 
but  in  the  more  evolved,  the  feelings  are  instinctive,  giving  rise  to 
intuition,  and  the  psychic  nature  is  more  active.  The  watery  signs 
govern  the  negative  and  more  dependent  side  of  the  desire  nature  ; 
they  seek  affection,  while  the  fiery  signs  prefer  to  give  it — the  latter 
are  the  pursuers,  the  former  the  receivers. 

The  next  pair  are  composed  of  airy  and  earthy  signs,  and  their 

nature  may  be  learned  by  comparison. 

Positive  J  n  =^  zz  Airy  and   ( The   mental   and 

Group      (   Gemini,  Libra,  Aquarius     Intellectual)     artistic  world. 

Negative]     njt  «  Vy  Earthy  and)  The  physical  and 

Group      (Virgo,  Taurus,  Capricorn  Solid       j  objective   world. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


46  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

This  group  is  composed  of  the  signs  that  have  more  to  do  with 
the  mind  than  the  feelings,  particularly  the  positive  signs  of  the 
group  belonging  to  the  airy  triplicity.  We  may  analyse  these  six 
signs  in  the  same  way  as  the  former  group,  the  airy  signs  representing 
the  intellectual,  educational,  mental,  artistic  or  professional  charac- 
teristics, and  the  earthy  the  practical,  business  and  political  side  of 
life.  The  former  Hve  more  in  the  intellectual  world  and  think  out 
the  plans  for  the  future ;  the  latter  carry  them  out  in  detail  by  prac- 
tical, solid,  matter-of-fact  methods.  Our  remarks  might  be  extended 
to  great  length  along  these  lines,  but  we  have  a  very  simple  method 
of  learning  the  exact  value  of  each  sign  apart  from  groups,  and  this 
is  obtained  by  studying  the  qualities,  which  are  Cardinal,  Fixed 
and  Mutable,  as  follows  ;   ; 

Quality  Signs         '^  Expression 

Cardinal      T   25   =fir  V:j>     Intellect,  Ambition  and  Ideality. 

Fixed  ^    SI   ^  -55?     Will,  Power  and  Purpose. 

Mutable      n   iijj    ^    X     Emotion,  Flexibility  and  Restlessness. 

The  first  four  signs  of  the  zodiac,  T  y  n  ffi,  are  physical  signs. 
The  four  middle  signs,  St  tiK  :^  iil»  are  psychic  signs,  and  the  last 
four  signs,  ^  V:f  -ccr  X ,  are  spiritual  signs,  but  until  the  true  nature  of 
each  sign  is  fully  understood  they  must  be  considered  in  a  general 
sense  only. 

Examining  the  signs  separately,  we  find  Aries  belongs  to  the 
positive,  cardinal  and  fiery  group.  We  have  thus  at  once  a  clue  to 
the  nature  of  the  sign  Aries.  In  its  positive  condition  we  see  that  it 
is  an  expressive  sign ;  and  we  gather  from  its  fiery  nature  that  it 
gives  an  inclination  to  act  independently  and  to  assert  its  force  ;  and, 
from  its  cardinal  nature,  we  may  judge  that  it  is  an  acute  sign,  giving 
prominence  to  all  that  it  indicates.  In  making  a  distinction  between 
the  positive  and  negative  signs,  we  may  consider  the  former  as 
more  directly  concerned  with  the  life  side  of  evolution,  and  the  nega- 
tive signs  as  being  more  closely  connected  with  the  form  side.  The 
energies  and  life-giving  properties  are  represented  by  the  positive 
signs,  and  the  media,  or  form,  through  which  the  life  works,  by  the 
negative  signs.  We  find  in  the  table  that  the  sign  Aries  governs  the 
head,  and  that  its  character  is  ram-like,  and  firom  this  we  may  judge 
that  the  activities  are  more  easily  expressed  through  the  head.     The 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  .  47 

ram  butts  bis  way,  through  obstacles,  and  those  in  whom  the  Aries 
nature  is  the  leading  characteristic  are  known  as  pioneers,  of  daunt- 
less courage,  and  fiery  enthusiasm.  On  reference  to  the  group  of 
triplicities  we  find  that  Aries  is  grouped  with  those  signs  governing 
the  positive  emotions^  Passing  now  to  the  table  of  quaUties,  we  find 
Aries  a  cardinal  sign,  giving  ambition,  progress  and  ideality.  It 
does  not  require  much  judgment  to  obtain  a  final  idea  regarding 
Aries.  As  this  sign  governs  the  |head,  we  may  easily  come  to  the 
conclusion  that  from  the  Aries  nature  we  shall  expect  to  find  the 
mental  emotions  the  most  prominent  part  of  their  character.  The 
life  forces  working  through  the  head  will  stimulate  the  higher  emo- 
tions, producing  ideality  and  clear  thought.  It  may  be  that  in  un- 
developed cases,  as  can  be  seen  by  planetary  influences,  this 
nature,  when  perverted,  will  be  passionate,  combative  and  deceptive  ; 
but  in  any  case  this  sign  endows  those  who  come  under  its  influence 
with  ithe  higher  aspirations  which  may  be  either  for  internal  develop- 
ment or  external  weffare. 

We  may  now  study  the  second  sign  of  the  zodiac,  Taurus,  the 
first  of  the  earthy  triplicity  in  the  order  of  the  signs.  This  is  a 
negative  sign,  and  we  have  classed  it  under  the  group  of  **  Negative- 
mind,"  belonging  to  those  signs  concerned  with  the  objective  and 
lower  mind.  Being  earthy  in  nature  it  is  dependent  upon  physical 
objects  for  expression.  Its  triplicity  and  quality  give  us  the  idea  of 
fixed  earth,  and  bull-like  character.  In  the  body  it  governs  the  neck 
and  throat,  that  part  of  the  physical  anatomy  upon  which  the  head 
rests  and  turns.  It  would  not  be  difficult  to  associate  either  great 
will-power  or  obstinacy  with  this  sign,  and  one  or  the  other  is  sure 
to  be  expressed  by  the  Taurean  nature.  Slow  to  move,  they,  however, 
move  to  purpose  when  aroused ;  quiet  and  inoffensive,  patient  and 
enduring,  always  acting  with  deliberation  and  rigid  movement,  we 
can  easily  form  the  idea  of  obedience  as  the  main  characteristic  of 
this  sign.  Duty  and  obedience  are  the  high  keynotes  of  the  Taurus 
nature,  but  when  undeveloped,  then  obstinacy  and  a  surly,  slothful 
indifference  may  be  expected,  yet  in  any  case  we  may  consider  that 
Taurus  is  the  sign  of  solidarity. 

Gemini,  the  third  sign  of  the  zodiac,  is  the  first  of  the  airy  tripli- 
city, and  it  is  mutable  in  quality.  All  the  mutable  signs  are  generally 
termed  common  signs  by  astrologers,  there  being  notliing  definii^  or 


Digitized  by 


Google 


48  ASTROLOGY   POR  ALL 

fixed  about  them.  They  are  each  composed  of  two  characters :  the 
twins ;  the  virgin  with  the  eats  of  corn  ;  the  archer,  half  man,  half 
horse ;  and  the  fishes.  Some  idea  of  this  duality  may  be  gathered 
firom  the  study  of  Gemini.  This  is  a  positive  sign  of  the  airy  tri- 
plicity,  and  we  have  placed  it  with  those  governing  the  positive  mind 
or  the  subjective  and  higher  mind.  The  Hindoos  symbolise  this 
sign  by  a  beautiful  woman,  amorous  and  fond  of  ornaments,  also  a 
man  clad  in  armour,  thus  indicating  the  double  nature  of  the  sign. 
.The  Icey  to  its  nature  is  obtained  from  the  knowledge  that,  although 
an  airy  sign,  it  belongs  to  the  mutable  group  of  signs,  all  of  which 
belong  to  change,  indecision  and  mutability.  We  may  connect  this 
sign  with  education  and  the  higher  mental  conditions,  but  still  inde- 
cisive and  impermanent.  If  we  may  now  use  comparison  to  help  us 
in  obtaining  a  clear  idea  with  regard  to  this  sign,  we  may  think  of 
the  other  airy  signs  for  a  moment.  Libra  is  of  the  cardinal  quaHty, 
and  thus  more  pronounced  and  active  in  expression,  and  from  the 
following  illustration  we  may  at  once  learn  to  distinguish  between 
these  signs,  Gemini  and  Libra.  The  Libra  type  of  mind  loves  colour 
and  expression,  and  an  artist  in  whom  the  Libra  quality  is  active 
would  paint  in  colours,  while  the  Gemini  artist  would  prefer  plain 
line  drawing,  pen  and  ink  sketches,  or  crayon  work.  The  mind  of 
the  Gemini  nature  is  plain,  but  decidfedly  more  professional  than 
business-like  ;  the  work,  however,  although  refined,  would  always  be 
mechanical. 

There  are  two  distinct  natures  in  the  Gemini,  and  it  would 
seem  as  though  the  mind  had  not  completely  severed  itself  from  the 
lower  senses,  and  we  can  endorse  one  astrological  writer's  comment 
on  this  sign,  that  the  Gemini  persons  reason  from  their  sensations. 
To  understand  the  nature  of  the  sign  Gemini,  two  clear  ideas  are 
necessary  :  first,  that  it  is  a  positive,  airy  sign  ;  second,  that  it  is  also 
a  common  or  mutable  sign,  and  from  these  two  factors  we  know,  that 
it  is  a  sign  that  causes  restlessness  and  a  constant  desire  for  change. 
It  gives  quickness  in  movement,  and  when  governing  those  who  are 
developed,  it  gives  aptitude  in  abstract  things;  but  when  those  who 
are  undeveloped  come  under  its  influence,  it  causes  irritability,  inde- 
cision, and  a  highly  impressionable  nature.  We  find  many  literary 
persons  who  cater  for  the  public  taste,  such  as  newspapet  men,  re- 
porters, collectors  of  news  and  scrappy  details,  <:oming  under  this 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  49 

sign.  The  sign  Gemini  seems  to  lack  concentration,  although  there 
is  often  motive  behind  all  its  actions;  but  the  worst  trait  of 
character  with  which  it  endows  its  children  is  diffusion.  They  may 
be  subject  to  many  extremes  and  moods,  but  they  never  lack  versa- 
tility, which  makes  those  bom  under  the  influence  of  this  sign  the 
best  persons  to  call  upon  in  an  emergency. 

*We'now  come  to  the  fourth  sign  of  the  zodiac,  Cancer,  the  first 
of  the  watery  triplicity,  and  the  second  of  the  cardinal  signs*  This 
sign  we  have  placed  with  those  concerned  with  the  negative  emotions. 
The  sign  Cancer  is  the  most  receptive  and  sensitive  sign  of  the 
zodiac.  This  sign  may  be  likened  to  a  limpid  lake,  and  its  ripples 
may  be  caused  either  by  movement  from  within  or  injection  from 
without.  It  is  first  negative  and  then  acute,  nearly  always  requiring 
action  to  come  from  without  to  stimulate  and  awaken  its  latency. 
From  this  we  may  judge  that  it  is  the  sign  which  has  precedence  in 
all  personal  matters.  The  Moon  has  her  greatest  affinity  with  this 
sign  ;  it  is,  therefore,  the  most  plastic,  and  all  the  personal  feelings 
and  emotions  that  spring  out  of  sensation,  fancy,  and  the  best 
imagination  arise  from  the  condition  of  this  sign.  Like  the  lake, 
it  reflects  and  gives  back  an  image  of  all  that  is  reflected  into  it,  and 
from  this  simile  we  can  understand  why  the  Cancer  person  has  a 
most  retentive  memory.  It  is  only  when  the  lake  is  clear  and  free 
from  disturbance  that  images  can  be  correctly  reflected,  and  by  the 
same  analogy,  it  is  only  when  the  feelings  are  impersonal  and  un- 
biased that  they  reflect  the  true  conditions  of  the  soul.  If  not  taken 
in  too  literal  a  sense,  the  three  watery  signs  may  be  considered  as 
representing  the  three  aspects  of  the  soul,  animal^  human  and  spiri- 
tual. Cancer  in  a  general  sense  is  the  negative  half  of  Leo,  and 
represents  the  sensitive  human  soul ;  but  this  is  not  to  be  taken  as  a 
hard  and  fast  rule,  for  the  sign  is  one  of  form,  and  represents  the 
film  or  shell  only.  -  There  is  one  feature  about  this  sign  that  may  be 
learned  from  the  crab,  its  physical  representative,  and  that  is,  ten- 
acity. The  Cancer  persons  can  hold  on,  crab-Hke,  and  they  will 
suffer  extremely  before  they  will  let  go.  When  undeveloped,  they 
retain  feelings  connected  with  the  lower  emotions,  and  are  then  often 
peevish,  morose  and  sour- tempered  persons  ;  but  when  advanced,  and 
receptive  to  the  very  best  influences,  they  know  how  to  economise 
and  make  excellent  providers  from  their  nourishing,  succouring  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


I  go  ASXROflLQGY  yOK  ALL 

su3tamii3g  condition,  which  is ,  always  at  the  disposal  of  those  who 
requixe  tjjeir  protection.  Weakness  and  strength  are  combined  in 
this  ^sign,  as  we  can  seie  by  the  illu;stration  that  the  crab  may  be  as 
easily  crushed  as  it  is  difficult  to  rel<ease  one*s-self  from  the  nip  of  its 
claw.  Cancer  gives  a  love  of  fame  morq  than  ambition.  The  nega- 
tive cardinal  signs  prefer  greatness  to  descend  upon  them  rather 
than  to  achieve  it.  When  pure,  the  Cancer  types  of  humanify  are 
very  psychic,  and  from  their  receptive  condition  they  become  in- 
.  tuitive  and  absorb  the  conditions  of  others,  readily  sensing  the  psychic 
atmosphere  around  th^ixi.  Their  greatest  fault  when  undeveloped  is 
their  inactivity,  and  they  need  a  stimulus  from  without  to  move  them 
to  action.  The  first  feeling  in  the  savage  is  hunger,  which  awakens 
the  dormant  feelings  that  eventually  make  the  growing  ego  hungry  . 

for  food  for  the  rfiind  as  well  as  food  for  the  body  ;  a  centre  has  to  be  ' 

formed,  and  the  first  centre  is  that  which  is  formed  in  the  breast, 
where  all  the  <ini?st  feelings  reside,  to  be  eventually  expressed  by  the 
true  Cancer  nature,  which  is  the  motherhood  or  maternal  principle. 
If  sensitive  and  easily  wounded,  they  are  also  loyal  and  conservative 
in  regard  to  their  ties  and  duties. 

The  fifth  sign  of  the  zodiac,  Leo,  is  a  fiery,  positive  sign,  ruling  the 
heart.  This  is  the  central  sign  of  the  fiery  triplicity,  and  from  its 
fixed  i^ature  we  may  judge  that  the  higher  emotions  are  the  chief 
centre  of  activity.  In  all  the  fixed  signs  we  may  expect  either  indif- 
ference and  obstinacy,  or  firmness  and  fixity  of  purpose.  Power  wxd 
austerity  are  the  marked  characteristics  of  the  Leo  nature,  and  the 
will  is  usually  more  internal  than  external ;  it  is  a  sign  of  strength 
and  magnanimity.  The  passional  nature  is  keen  and  ardent,  all  the 
feelings  coming  direct  from  the  heart.  From  its  position  as  centre  of 
the  fiery  signs,  it  is  more  potent  and  full  of  meaning  than  the  other 
fiery  signs  (this  appHes  to  the  central  sign  of  each  triplicity).  Love 
of  power  and  command  are  the  chief  Leo  characteristics  ;  they  Jive  in 
a  world  of  their  own  creation,  and  nothing  seems  too  great  for  their 
ideality.  Being  full  of  faith  they  accomplish  and  achieve  by  persis- 
tent determination  ;  to  them  their  will  is  law.  When  developed, 
they  carry  around  them  the  most  harmonious  vibrations  of  the  twelve 
.  signs,  and  have  the  power  to  soothe  and  heal.  This  sign  prompts  the 
higher  emotions  and  gives  love  of  honesty  and  the  higher  morahty. 
When  undeveloped,  the  characteristics  are  pride,  arrogance  and  ex- 
treme passion. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  5I 

In  dealing  with  Virgo,  the  sixth  sign  of  the  zodiac,  we  first  note  that 
it  is  a  ne^tive  earthy,  mutable  sigh,  governing  the  objective  mind.  It 
is  the  central  sign  of  the  earthy  triplicity,  and,  in  common  with  the 
earthy  signs,  it  governs  the  practical  and  solid  side  of  formative  life.  It 
is  a  sign  conferring  upon  its  subjects  industry  and  the  ability  to  follow 
many  different  pursuits,  and  the  powers  of  adaptability  to  circum* 
stance  and  environment.  In  this  sign  are  provided  all  the  require- 
ments of  the  business  nature.  The  mind  is  full  of  feeling  of  the 
objective  type,  and  the  whole  nature  is  very  psychic,  pliable  and 
instinctive. 

This  completes  the  general  description  of  the  first  six  signs  of 
the  zodiac.  The  remaining  six  may  be  briefly  dealt  with,  a  repeti- 
tion of  the  method  for  judgment  being  unnecessary. 

Libra  is  the  centre  of  the  airy  signs,  and  cardinal  in  quality.  It 
denotes  balance,  justice  and  equilibrium.  It  is  an  ambitious  and 
aspiring  sign,  refined,  harmonious,  and  expansive  in  nature,  Inteh 
lectually,  it  gives  wonderful  powers  of  perception  and  comparison, 
and  when  developed,  those  who  are  under  its  influence  are  compas- 
sionate and  lovers  of  unity  and  equality.  This  sign  represents  the 
state  of  consciousness  that  is  between  the  higher  and  the  lower 
emotions ;  the  dispassionate  and  equalised  state  of  the  intellect,  the 
pure  mind^  free  from  the  senses :  it  represents  the  point  in  human 
evolution  in  which  the  mind  is  weighed  in  the  balance.  Libra  being 
tl;^  central  aign  of  the  zodiac. 

Scorpio  is  a  fixed  sign,  and  the  centre  of  the  negative  watery 
signs.  It  is  the  sign  of  reserved  force  and  power.  This  may  be 
termed  a  formative  sign.  Moulded  by  feelings,  the  character  is  of 
the  strongest  type,  the  worst  as  well  as  the  best  characters  being 
formed  under  the  influences  of  this  sign.  In  the  undeveloped  we 
find  pride,  jealousy,  and  secretiveness,  and  the  power  (or  evil  works 
in  the  direction  of  hatred  and  vindictiveness.  In  the  developed  we 
find  the  powers  of  the  magician  concealed,  Scorpio  being  the  most 
mystical  of  signs. 

Sagittarius  is  the  ninth  sign  of  the  zodiac.  It  is  a  mutable, 
fiery,  positive  sign.  In  common  with  the  mutable  signs,  two  natures 
are  often  expressed,  and  those  under  their  influences  are  impression- 
able, and  very  sensitive  through  the  emotions.  This  sigi^  is  half 
human  and  half  animal,  the  first  half  tending  to  religion  and  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


V 


52  ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL 

higlier  emotions,  and  the  latter  haif  to  matters  connected  witn  sports 
and  external  pleasures.  In  the  undeveloped  .we  find  catel^s^ness, 
restlessness  and-extrenres. 

Capricorn,  a  cardinal,  earthy  and  negative  sign,  is  the  tenth 
sign  of.  the  zodiac.  The  ambitious  nature  of  this  sign  is  symbolised 
by  the  goat,  whd  must  teach  the  highest  summit  of  the  moutitain. 
This  is  the  most  formative  of  the  earthy  signs  ;  it  gives  perseverance, 
in4ustry,  prudence,  patience  and  thoughtfulness.  The  undeveloped 
are  cap^icioiis,  crafty,  suspicious  and  exacting. 

Aquarius,  the  eleventh  sipn  of  the  zodiac,  is  a  fixed,  airy,  positive 
sign,  of  the  mature  of  fixed  air ;  it  gives  concentration  and  firm- 
ness. The  symbol  of  this  sign  is  the  man,  thus  denoting  it  to  be 
the  most  humane  of  the  twelve  signs.  It  gives  intuition,  faithfulness^ 
and  marked  artistic  tendencies. 

Pisces  is  the  twelfth  and  last  sign  of  the  Zodiac.  It  is  a  watery, 
mutable,  negative  sign.  It  is  the  most  dual  of  the  signs.  The  emo- 
tions are  deep  and  silent.  A  marked  feature  of  this  sign  is  the  love 
for  dumb  animals  that  its  natives  possess.  They  are  always  kind  and 
hospitable ;  but  often  very  mediumistic  and  psychic. 

In  this  chapter  we  have  gained  a  deeper  insight  into  the  nature  of 
the  zodiac ;  but  there  is  much  more  to  learn  regarding  these  signs 
that  will  require  other  chapters ;  all  that  has  been  said  should  be  well 
studied,  as  it  will  save  much  lat>our  and  difficulty  in  connection  with 
judgment  of  nativities.  We  shall  again  take  up  these  signs  in  the 
chapter  on  decanates  and|the  rulers  of  signs.  We  may  now  pass  on 
to  a  consideration  of  the  Moon  in  the  signs,  and  the  positive  and 
negative  centres. 

It  is  now  essential  to  memorise  the  symbols  of  the  signs  of  the 
zodiac  and  their  numerical  order  as  follows :    . 


Name 

Aries 

Taurus 

Gemini 

Cancer 

Leo 

Virgo 

Symbol  . 

T 

8 

n 

® 

k 

m 

Numerical 
Order 

I. 

11. 

III-. 

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

Name  .    Libra     Scorpio    Sagltfaritts    Capricorn    Aquarius    Pisces 
Symbol      :^  in  t  yf  »K  K 

^cSder"^^    VII.     VIII.  IX.  X.   .  XL  XII 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  53 

CHAPTER  XVII. 
The  Moon  and  the  Zodiac 

The  Sun  rules  by  day  and  the  Moon  rules  by  night.  The  Sun 
represents  the  positive  life-giving  principle,  and  the  Moon  the  negative 
or  receptive.  A  great  portion  of  humanity  at  the  present  time  is 
preparing  to  emerge  from  the  illusive  fascination  of  the  Moon's 
influence,  but  it  will  be  many  centuries  ere  the  majority  is  free  from 
its  limitations.  We  have  said  in  previous  chapters  that  the  delinea- 
tions for  the  Sun*s  apparent  passage  |hrough  the  signs  each  month 
would  also  indicate  the  character  of  the  personality  when  the  Moon 
was  posited  in  that  sign  at  birth,  and  with  certain  modifications  this 
is  true.  The  Sun  represents  the  heart,  the  higher  emotions,  the 
purer  part  of  our  nature,  and  the  character  which  is  at  the  root  of 
our  being ;  whilst  the  Moon  represents  the  brain,  the  senses,  and  the 
part  of  our  nature  which  cognises  and  gains  experiences  from  the 
physical  and  objective  world.  The  distinction  between  the  two 
luminaries  is  very  marked  and  definite,  although  they  represent  two 
hajves  of  one  whole.  Objectively  we  see  the  light  from  the  Moon 
when  she  is  above  the  earth  and  the  Sun  below,  and  subjectively  we 
know  that  when  the  personality  is  strong  and  the  individuality  weak, 
the  lunar  nature  is  in  evidence.  Strong  personalities  are  full  of 
desire  and  self-hood,  whilst  strong  individuals  are  more  expansive, 
broad,  liberal,  and  magnanimous.  '^he  former  cling  to  form, 
perception,  and  objects,  the  senses  are  more  sensitive,  keen,  an^ 
active  ;  whilst  the  latter  are  not  so  bound  by  the  senses,  living  more  in 
the  mind  and  the  higher  emotions,  the  subjective  world  being  of 
mofe  importance  than  the  objective ;  reflection,  thoughtfnlness,  and 
will-power  are  stronger  than  desire  and  impulse. 

Until  the  student  of  human  nature  has  learned  to  distinguish 
between  the  character  as[expressed  by  the  heart  and  the  brain,  he  will 
find  it  difficult  to  discover  how  much  individual  character  there  is 
apart  frpm  the  personal,  and  how  much  is  personal  and  how  much 
individual ;  particularly  at  the  present  time,  when,  comparatively 
speaking,  there  are  so  few  who  know  themselves.  As  a  general  rule, 
the  Moon  placed  higher  in  the  heavens  than  the  Sun  is  an  indication 
that  the  personality  is  the  stronger.  When  both  Sun  and  Moon  are 
above  the  earth,   both   characters   may   be   strong.      In   nocturnal 


Digitized  by 


Google 


54  ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 

horoscopes,  that  is,  when  the  birth  takes  place  after  sunset,  the 
Moon  is  more  often  above  the  earth  ;  but  it  will  also  happen  that 
both  luminaries  are  below,  and  both  may  therefore  be  weak  and  the 
life  correspondingly  unfortunate.  All  this,  however,  will  be  explained 
in  the  judgment  of  horoscopes. 

We  may  now  proceed  to  give  a  few  hints  as  to  the  nature  of  the 
personality  when  the  Moon  is  passing  through  the  twelve  signs. 

THE    MOON    IN    ARIES 

This  makes  the  person  an  ^enthusiast  in  some  direction  ;  impul- 
sive, aggressive  and  militant  in  manner,  sometimes  irritable  and  liable 
to  fits  of  anger.  Insists  on  having  his  own  way;  disobedient  to 
superiors ;  independent  and  self-reliant.  Somewhat  volatile  or 
changeable,  and  dependent  upon  impulse;  disliking  conventionality 
or  discipline.  He  hiay  achieve  popularity  or  notoriety.  May  be 
placed  in  some  position  in  which  he  exercises  authority  over  a  num- 
ber of  people  or  is  head  over  many.  He  will  be  at  the  head  of  some 
undertaking,  or  will  be  in  some  way  prominent  in  his  sphere  of  life. 
He  will  go  more  by  intellect  than  intuition.  The  mother  will  play  a 
prominent  part  in  the  life  in  some  way,  often  not  a  sympathetic  or  for- 
tunate one  ;  and  there  is  likelihood  of  differences  between  the  native 
and  his  parents,  or  the  latter  may  die  early  or  be  separated  from  him. 
This  position  favours  military  pursuits,  independent  or  original 
ventures.  He  will  strike  out  a  path  for  himself  or  at  least  attempt  to 
do  so;  and  much  that  he  does,  both  wrong  and  right,  will  be  unex- 
pected by  his  friends  and  contrary  to  their  advice.  Mysticism  or 
occultism  of  some  kind  may  show  in  his  life ;  or  the  tendency  may 
take  the  form  of  a  necessity  for  secrecy  in  some  of  his  affairs ;  his 
occupation  may  sometimes  involve  secrecy  or  mystery  or  be  of  low 
class,  though  this  is  very  contrary  to  his  nature.  He  may  meet  with 
unpopularity  or  threatened  scandal  of  some  kind. 

THE    MOON    IN    TAURUS 

The  personality  is  quiet  and  unimpulsive ;  persistent,  determined, 
and  not  to  be  thwarted  in  his  aims.  Somewhat  hopeful,  ambitious, 
and  desirous  of  excelling.  Follows  established  customs,  conserva- 
tive by  nature,  resists  change  and  outside  influences.  This  lunar 
position  gains  friends  for  the  native,  and  favours  the  acquisition  of 
money,  houses,  or  land.     It  favours  occupations  of  the  nature  of  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  55 

earthy  element ;  dealing  in  land,  houses,  heavy  goods,  old  established 
businesses ;  or  the  native  may  succeed  to  the  father's  business  and 
gain  or  inherit  from  a  parent. 

Sometimes  the  occupation  may  be  one  considered  low  class, 
plebeian,  or  unpopular,  involving  secrecy  or  mystery ;  but  it  will 
generally  be  remunerative,  and  the  native  may  prosper  financially. 
It  is  favourable  for  occupations  of  water  and  liquids,  and  for  living 
near  rivers  or  on  the  coast;  and  slightly  good  for  money  derived 
from  companies,  wholesale  trading,  associations,  societies,  etc.  The 
native  is  somewhat  sensuous  and  material,  but  sociable  and  of  good 
disposition.  It  is  slightly  favourable  for  singing,  music,  painting ;  for 
gaining  friends  and  joining  societies. 

THE    MOON    IN    GEMINI 

This  lunar  position  strengthens  the  intellect,  and  makes  the 
native  a  lover  of  books,  of  study,  of  scientific  and  literary  pursuits ; 
and  inclines  him  to  some  occupation  of  a  mercurial  nature.  He  is 
active  in  mind  and  body ;  likely  to  change  his  residence  frequently, 
or  has  more  than  one  house ;  often  goes  on  short  journeys  ;  travels, 
or  is  out  and  about  a  good  deal ;  is  often  out-doors,  walking  or  riding, 
etc.,  or  calling  on  other  people.  He  is  skilful  and  dexterous  with  his 
hands  and  arms.  Is  able  to  live  by  his  wits,  and  may  gain  money  as 
messenger,  traveller,  salesman,  speaker,  clerk,  writer,  designer, 
journalist,  engraver,  artist,  sculptor,  or  by  study  and  literature.  May 
have  more  than  one  occupation,  or  may  change  his  occupation.  The 
mind  is  prone  to  change,  and  there  may  be  irresolution,  or  lack  of 
perseverance ;  in  a  bad  horoscope  this  may  show  as  underhanded- 
ness,  subtlety,  lack  of  straightforwardness  and  honesty,  especially  in 
matters  of  the  second,  third  and  fourth  houses. 

THE    MOON    IN    CANCER 

This  indicates  a  personality  fond  of  ease  and  comfort,  homely 
in  his  habits,  and  attached  to  his  family.  It  attaches  him  to  his 
mother,  whom  he  may  resemble.  He  is  friendly  and  sociable  in 
manner,  is  imaginative,  emotional  and  changeable.  He  is  influenced 
greatly  by  his  surroundings,  is  sensitive  to  outside  influences,  and  to 
some  extent  falls  in  readily  with  the  ways  and  methods  of  others, 
adopts  their  suggestions,  sympathises  with  the  joys  and  sorrows 
of    others,   and  takes  his  colouring   from  outside   to    some    extent. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


56  ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 

He  is  mo^t  fortunate  when  acting  under  the  direction  of,  or 
in  accordance  with,  the  advice  of  someone  else.  But  this  may  be 
greatly  modified  if  positive  signs  or  planets  are  prominent  in  the 
nativity  ;  under  the  influence  of  Mars,  or  martial  signs,  especially, 
he  may  show  much  positiveness  and  independence.  There  is  some 
ability  for  acting,  mimicking,  expressing  the  thoughts  and  emotions 
of  others ;  also  for  music,  painting  or  poetry.  This  position  relates 
somewhat  to  mediumship,  psychism,  and  the  astral  plane  generally. 
The  native  is  drawn  to  the  watery  element ;  lives  near  water  or  travels 
by  water ;  deals  in  liquids ;  and  is  fortunate  with  house  or  land 
property  and  shipping. 

THE    MOON    IN    LEO 

This  lunar  position  tends  to  uplift  the  native,  to  put  him  in 
positions  of  responsibility  or  prominence,  and  to  give  him  authority 
over  others  as  head,  or  manager,  or  director.  It  gives  the  favour  of 
those  in  liigher  ranks  of  Hfe  than  the  native.  He  is  ambitious,  desirous 
of  occupying  a  prominent  place,  and  does  not  hesitate  to  come  before 
the  public.  He  is  honourable,  generous  in  money  matters,  high 
minded,  candid,  and  warm  hearted.  He  is  susceptible  in  affairs  of 
the  heart,  a  favourite  with  the  opposite  sex,  and  a  sincere  lover.  It 
favours  intuition  and  genius  ;  it  gives  love  of  music,  poetry,  or  painting. 
It  gives  some  love  of  luxuries,  pleasures,  perfumes,  jewels,  fine  clothes, 
etc. 

THE  MOON    IN    VIRGO 

The  native  has  good  intellectual  powers  and  is  capable  of  follow- 
ing some  intellectual  pursuit  ;  he  has  a  good  memory  and  learns 
easily.  1 1  covers  a  great  variety  of  occupations :  servant,  manager, 
agent,  or  subordinate  in  any  capacity  ;  any  occupation  connected  with 
grain  or  food-stuffs,  such  as  farmer,  miller,  grocer,  maltster,  con- 
fectioner; and  any  connected  with  drugs  or  medicine,  chemist, 
druggist,  herbalist,  analyst,  doctor,  dispenser,  etc.  He  makes  a 
trustworthy  and  fortunate  servant  and  himself  is  fortunate  through 
servants  or  those  under  him.  This  position,  taken  alone,  tends  to 
make  him  quiet  and  easy  going,  somewhat  irresolute,  not  ambitious 
or  pretentious.  He  has  many  friends,  especially  female  friends. 
May  belong  to  some  company,  firm,  society,  or  association.  There 
is  likelihood  of  many  short  journeys  and  work  as  secretary,  messenger^, 
clerk,  traveller,  schoolmaster,  etc. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  57 

THE    MOON    IN   LIBRA 

This  position  favours  general  popularity.  It  gives  fondness  for 
music,  poetry,  and  the  fine  arts  generally,  and  much  ability  in  this 
direction.  The  native  is  affectionate,  good-natured,  kind  in  manner 
and  easily  gains  friends.  The  native  is  fond  of  company,  society  and 
friends.  Much  of  his  fate  and  many  events  of  his  life  will  come  about 
through  his  association  with  other  people  ;  he  will  be  greatly  swayed 
and  influenced  by  other  people ;  generally  by  some  one  person.  It 
tends  strongly  to  partnership,  not  merely  in  business,  but  in  almost 
all  affairs  of  life.  He  works  with  another  person  in  nearly  all  under- 
takings ;  and,  without  necessarily  being  irresolute,  depends  largely 
upon  someone  else,  and  can  get  along  best  in  almost  all  things  when 
associated  with  someone.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  occupation 
and  position  in  life. 

THE    MOON    IN    SCORPIO 

This  lunar  position  makes  the  native  very  firm  and  determined, 
self-reliant,  and  assured,  and  well  able  to  stand  alone  and  fight  his 
own  battles.  He  is  abrupt  and  plain  spoken,  positive,  energetic  and 
capable  of  hard  work,  though  also  fond  of  the  good  things  of  the 
world  and  of  easy  living.  He  is  conservative  and  averse  to  change, 
especially  if  forced  upon  him  from  without ;  he  is  diflScult  to  influence 
and  may  be  very  obstinate ;  and  yet  for  his  own  purposes  he  will 
sometimes  appear  very  revolutionary  and  changeable,  and  will  advo- 
cate or  carry  out  great  and  revolutionary  changes.  He  is  sometimes 
irritable,  angry,  and  revengeful;  this  being  a  very  bad  position  if 
backed  up  by  other  evil  influences.  It  does  not  favour  morality,  and 
may  give  habits  of  drinking ;  it  often  causes  a  coarseness  in  speech  or 
manner,  and  threatens  some  scandal  to  the  native  ;  it  rather  tends 
against  fineness  of  feeling  and  refined  instincts.  It  inclines  to 
mediumship,  psychism  and  occultism.  A  death  occurs  in  the  native's 
family,  or  in  the  ranks  of  their  close  associates,  shortly  before  or 
soon  after  his  birth  or  early  in  his  life  ;  and  he  has  much  to  do  with 
death,  acts  as  executor,  is  frequently  brought  into  relation  with  the 
dead,  or  may  follow  some  occupation  connected  with  the  dead.  It 
attracts  to  the  opposite  sex  in  any  horoscope ;  favours  marriage  in  a 
male  horoscope,  but  threatens  disharmony  in  the  married  state  or  in 
the  relations  with  the  opposite  sex. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


58  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

THE  MOON  IN  SAGITTARIUS 

This  position  gives  a  quick,  restless  and  unsettled  manner,  either 
to  the  body  or  mind ;  the  native  is  active  in  body  and  fond  of  physical 
exercise,  sports,  athletics,  is  a  quick  walker  and  worker.  He  is 
inclined  to  travel,  and  changes  his  abode  frequently.  His  disposition 
is  sincere  and  honourable,  kindly  and  good-humoured.  The  native  is 
religious  and  sincere  in  his  belief  even  if  it  be  unorthodox.  There  is 
some  inclination  for  mysticism,  psychism,  and  the  occult ;  he  is  a 
natural  teacher  or  preacher,  and  may  have  something  of  the  prophet  in 
his  nature.  The  intuition  is  increased  and  made  more  active,  and 
there  may  be  some  psychic  gift,  such  as  clairvoyance.  There  is  a 
tendency  to  dreaming  and  somnambulism.  There  may  be  talent  or 
even  genius  for  religion,  philosophy,  music,  poetry,  etc.  In  the 
lower  type  of  horoscope  the  animal  side  of  the  sign  will  show  rather 
than  the  religious,  and  then  occupations  and  amusements  connected 
with  shipping  and  horses  will  be  prominent  in  the  life.  He  is  a  faith- 
ful worker  or  servant,  and  himself  benefits  by  servants  or  those  under 
him.     He  may  have  two  occupations  or  may  change  his  occupation. 

THE  MOON  IN  CAPRICORN 

This  tends  to  bring  the  native  before  the  public  for  good  or  evil, 
popularity  or  notoriety,  ^hough  it  usually  has  some  drawback  attach- 
ing to  it ;  he  may  achieve  relative  fame  or  notoriety,  or  may  move  in 
some  sphere  that  brings  him  before  many  people.  If  well  aspected 
at  birth,  he  may  be  vety  popular  as  the  head  of  some  undertaking, 
may  attract  attention  as  a  prominent  or  responsible  person  in  some 
way,  for  something  he  has  done  or  with  which  he  is  associated ;  but 
if  badly  aspected  in  the  nativity,  the  publicity  signified  by  this 
position  may  be  of  an  unpleasant  nature.  It  gives  some  degree 
of  rulership,  generalship,  and  administrative  ability,  which  is 
intensified  if  the  sun  is  in  a  cardinal  sign,  or  if  a  cardinal  sign  is 
rising.  There  is  always  some  drawback  or  difficulty  attaching  to  the 
occupation,  to  the  fame  or  to  the  position  the  native  gains ;  he 
may  raise  up  enemies,  open  or  secret,  or  his  reputation  may  suffer, 
with  or  without  his  having  deserved  it.  The  native  is  somewhat  fond 
of  show,  is  rather  selfish,  careful  with  money  matters,  calculating  and 
cautious,  and  knows  how  to  influence  others,  but  is  often  cold  by 
nature  and  thinks  too  little  of  the  feelings  of  others.     If  the  horoscope 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  59 

is  a  good  one,  the  more  undesirable  characteristics  of  this  position 
may  be  obviated.  If  other  influences  assist,  he  may  attain  very 
considerable  fame  or  prominence. 

THE  MOON  IN  AQUARIUS 

This  lunar  position  gives  some  inclination  for  astrology,  fortune 
telling,  dreaming,  visions,  mediumship,  mysticism,  and  the  occult 
generally.  Subjects  that  are  unusual,  original,  eccentric,  and  novel, 
attract  the  native.  He  may  become  a  freemason,  or  join  some 
secret  or  mystical  society,  association  or  brotherhood.  He  is  broad 
and  humanitarian  in  his  sympathies ;  fraternises  readily  with  those 
who  are  congenial  to  him,  is  easily  drawn  into  the  company  of  such, 
and  will  be  found  in  some  club,  society,  association,  or  group  of  those 
similarly  minded.  He  has  an  inclination  for  political,  educational,  and 
scientific  work,  and  may  join  any  movement  or  public  body  relating 
to  these  ;  has  some  inclination  for  local  politics  and  municipal  affairs. 
He  is  sociable  and  sympathetic  in  manner,  and  desirous  of  the  good 
opinion  pf  others,  and  yet  may  be  very  independent,  unorthodox,  and 
unconventional  at  times.  It  increases  the  imagination,  intuition,  and 
mental  sensitiveness  generally.  It  is  slightly  unfavourable  for  the 
constitution,  especially  the  nervous  system.  If  the  Moon  is  afflicted 
the  eyesight  may  suffer. 

THE     MOON   IN   PISCES 

The  native  is  quiet,  retiring,  and  easy-going,  is  restless  and  fond  of 
variety,  easily  changes  his  mind,  is  irresolute  and  not  always  to  be  de- 
pended upon,  is  ratber  easily  discouraged,  and  meets  with  obstacles,  mis- 
fortune and  opposition  in  life.  It  gives  a  liking  for  reading  of  a  roms^ntic 
or  emotional  kind,  for  poetry  and  music  that  appeals  to  the  emotions 
and  feelings.  As  speaker,  writer,  or  composer,  the  native  is  fluent, 
copious,  imaginative,  and  diffuse.  He  inclines  to  be  religious,  but  is 
likely  to  be  more  emotional  than  intellectual;  to  feel  rather  than  to 
reason  out.  He  is  sometimes  wanting  in  buoyancy  and  hope,  is  too 
serious  or  too  easily  depressed,  and  may  lack  matter-of-fact  common 
sense  and  humour.  There  may  be  a  tendency  to  intemperance  or  dis- 
sipation, laudanum  drinking,  etc.  Mediumship,  clear  dreaming,  and 
various  psychic  powers  may  manifest  themselves.  It  softens  the 
frame  and  increases  the  fleshy  and  glandular  structures  and  is  not 
favourable  for  robust  health.     There  is  danger  from  secret  enemies  ; 


Digitized  by 


Google 


6o  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

the  native  may  himself  not  be  quite  straightforward ;  and  there  is 
liability  to  detention  in  hospital,  poor  house,  prison,  etc. ;  but  the 
worst  effects  will  not  follow  unless  there  are  accompanying  bad  as- 
pects, or  other  indications  in  the  nativity. 

We  may  now  definitely  establish  in  our  mind  the  idea  that  the 
Sun  represents  the  positive  centre,  from  which  the  true  life  is  flowing, 
and  that  the  Moon  is  representative  of  the  receiver,  or  the  negative 
and  magnetic  point. 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

The  Solar-Lunar  Combinations 

It  often  happens  that  the  birth  time  is  not  accurately  known  any 
further  than  the  day  of  the  month  and  year,  this  rendering  it  impos- 
sible to  cast  the  horoscope.  When  this  is  the  case,  the  Sun  in  the 
signs  as  delineated  in  Chapter  IV.  will  give  us  some  indication  as  to 
the  individual  character,  but  it  is  often  found  that  these  individual 
characteristics  have  to  be  considerably  modified.  It  then  becomes 
necessary  to  know  what  sign  the  Moon  occupied  on  the  day  of  birth, 
and  to  enable  those  who  do  not  know  the  time  on  the  day  they  were 
bom,  the  Moon's  position  is  given  in  the  chapters  that  follow  from 
the  year  1850  to  1900. 

It  is  quite  true  that  the  solar  position  considerably  influences  the 
permanent  or  moral  character  of  the  native,  also  that  the  Moon  exer- 
cises a  considerable  amount  of  influence,  according  to  the  sign  she  is 
in,  over  the  personal  character  or  that  part  of  the  consciousness  that 
is  expressed  through  the  brain,  and  when  the  foregoing  chapters  have 
been  carefully  studied  so  as  to  know  the  exact  value  of  these  solar 
and  lunar  positions,  it  becomes  a  simple  matter  of  blending  these  two 
influences  together  to  discover  the  characteristics  of  those  born  on 
certain  days.  The  following  blending  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  in  the 
various  signs,  which  may  be  called  solar  and  lunar  combinations,  will 
apply  to  all  persons  born  on  those  days  irrespective  of  the  other 
planetary  positions,  but  ni6dified  to  a  considerable  extent  by  the  rising 
sign,  which  will  be  dealt  with  separately  in  the  succeeding  chapters. 

The  principle  upon  which  these  solar-lunar  combinations  are  based 
is  to  make  the  Sun  the  positive,  primary,  and  life-giving  element,  and 
the  Moon  the  negative  or  secondary  and  formative  element,  and  when 
the  nature  of  the  sign  is  thoroughly  understood,  it  can  easily  be  seen 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  6r 

how  iar  the  life  side,  as  represented  by  the  Sun,  influences  the 
character,  or -how  far  the  form  side,  as  represented  by  the  Moon, 
affects  the  personality.  And  to  save  much  confusion,  the  student 
should  impress  the  fact  on  his  mind  that  the  Sun  represents  the  life 
side,  governing  the  individual,  and  the  Moon  the  form  side,  govern- 
ing the  whole  of  the  personal  and  physical  characteristics.  These 
two  symbols  blended  together  represent  spirit- matter,  the  one  being 
dependent  on  the  other  for  expression.  The  following  blend  of  the 
life  and  form  principles  should  now  be  carefully  studied. 

THE    SUN    IN    ARIES 

I.  * 

The  Sun's  apparent  passage  through  the  celestial  sign  Aries  has 
been  thoroughly  described  in  Chapter  IV.,  therefore  it  is  only  neces- 
sary to  now  observe  that  the  primary  characteristics  of  the  Sun  in 
this  sign  are  force  and  energy,  and  the  fundamental  basis  of  the 
character  will  consist  of  an  ambitious,  aspiring,  enthusiastic  nature ; 
and  during  the  month  that  the  Sun  remains  in  this  sign,  the  twelve 
lunar  positions  will  either  considerably  modify  this  primary  influence 
or  accentuate  it,  and  increase  its  manifestation.  But  without  the 
Moon  to  focus  the  rays  of  the  Sun  and  collect  the  influences  that  are 
constantly  being  distributed,  the  individual  character  would  always 
be  flying  off  at  a  tangent,  having  no  medium  through  which  it  could  be 
focussed.  But  in  studying  each  one  of  these  combinations  it  will  be 
well  to  remember  that  the  solar  force  is  the  primary  influence,  the 
lunar  centre  always  being  a  negative,  secondary,  and  expressive 
aspect. 

THE    SUN    AND    MOON    IN    ARIES 

I.- 1. — (Conjunction) 

This  is  equivalent  to  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  being  in  conjunc- 
tion, or  in  the  first  house  of  the  horoscope,  and  with  regard  to  cha- 
racter, will  act  in  a  similar  manner.  This  position  of  Sun  and  Moon 
will  accentuate  the  consciousness  in  the  brain,  giving  great  activity 
of  thought  and  quickness  of  perception,  with  strong  inclinations  to 
excitement,  endowing  those  born  under  this  combination  with  an 
intense  desire  to  be  at  the  head  of  all  things;  to  be  intellectual 
leaders  and  pioneers  in  all  mental  affairs.  The  Sun  will  in  this  case 
be  stronger  than  the  Moon,  the  sign  Aries  being  of  a  fiery  nature,  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


62  ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL 

not  watery  like. the  Moon.  Over-work^ excessive  worry,  intense  ex- 
citement, and  too  much  activity  would  tend  to  produce  diseases  of  the 
brain,  and  if  persisted  in,,  would  finally  produce  mental  derangemeiftt. 
This  combination  increases  the  self-esteem  and  love  of  approbation> 
and  through  too  much  independence  brings  changes  in  life  and  many 
troubles  following  on  impulsive  action  and  rash  conduct.  It  will 
cause  those  under  its  influence  to  gravitate  to  positions  of  trust  and 
responsibility,  or  where  responsibility  is  undertaken. 

THE  SUN  IN  ARIES  AND  MOON  IN  TAURUS 

I.- 1 1.     {Sinister  Semi-sextile) 

The  Sun  is  exalted  in  the  sign  Aries,  and  the  Moon  in  the  sign 
Taurus.  This  combination  strengthens  the  positive  and  negative 
elements,  and  produces  a  very  strong  character.  The*  physical  side 
of  the  nature  is  practical;  but  with  the  force  of  the  Sun  in  Aries 
behind  it,  the  character  becomes  a  very  determined  one,  the  ideal  and 
practical  being  very  well  blended.  The  disposition  is  composed  of 
the  Martial  Venusian  elements,  and  the  sensuous  nature  is  called  into 
activity.  The  intellect  and  intuitions  are  very  marked,  but  there  is 
a  great  tendency  to  be  self-willed  and  dogmatic.  The  magnetic 
forces  are  very  powerful,  and  all  the  senses  very  keen,  the  Moon  in 
Taurus  supplying  what  the  Sun  in  Aries  usually  lacks.  It  is  a 
splendid  combination  for  mental  expression,  and  the  nature  tends  to 
become  harmonious;  but  there  is  a  great  deal  of  sensitiveness.  Those 
bom  under  this  combination  may  become  mental  and  physical 
healers,  especially  along  the  Hues  of  hygiene.  This  sign  gives  an 
abundance  of  vitality.  It  tends  to  make  the  hfe  fortunate,  the  per- 
sonality being  able  to  carry  out  the  ideals  of  the  Aries  individuality. 
This  is  a  good  position  for  financial  success  in  Hfe,  also  for  posi- 
tions of  trust  and  authority. 

THE   SUN    IN    ARIES   AND    MOON    IN    GEMINI 

I. -III.  {Sinister  Sextile) 
This  combination  gives  a  considerable  amount  of  mental  activity 
and  manual  dexterity,  and  there  is  apt  to  be  a  great  deal  of  restless- 
ness and  over-exertion.  The  nature  is  a  very  changeable  one,  loving 
variety  and  expression  ;  but  there  is  a  lack  of  determination  and  tena- 
city of  purpose.  This  combination  gives  refinement  and  artistic  ten- 
dencieF,  and  makes   those  under   its   influence    good    novelists  and 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  63 

clever  writers  of  fiction.  The  dualistic  tendencies  of  the  Moon  caus^ 
much  of  the  qualities  of  Aries  to  be  wasted,  and  there  is  often  more 
said  than  is  done.  It  is  not  a  very  reliable  combination  until 
thought-control  has  been  practised,  but  it  favours  mechanical  ability. 
Over-activity  and  excitement  will  tend  to  produce  nervous  troubles, 
and  rest  will  often  be  required  to  restore  harmony  to  the  system. 
This  position  is  good  for  travel  and  all  literary  undertakings  and 
promises  some  success  in  life  through  mental  efforts. 

THE    SUN    IN    ARIES    AND   MOON    IN    CANCER 

I. -IV.     {Sinisier  Square) 

This  is  an  exceedingly  sensitive  combination,  giving  a  consider- 
able amount  of  ambition  and  a  love  of  fame  ;  but  the  Moon  being  re- 
ceptive in  the  sign  Cancer,  it  adds  to  all  the  splendid  ideals  of  the 
Aries  nature.  It  increases  the  intuitive  and  psychic  faculties,  ex- 
pands the  imagination,  improves  the  memory  and  strengthens  the 
brain.  The  sensitiveness  of  this  combination  causes  those  born 
under  it  to  feel  very  keenly  the  surrounding  conditions,  but  they  are 
easily  able  to  reason  and  arrive  at  correct  conclusions  when  not  too 
approbative ;  there  is  generally  a  great  deal  of  anxiety,  especially 
in  regard  to  domestic  affairs  or  matters  connected  with  home  life. 
Care  in  diet  is  necessary  for  the  successful  expression  of  this  com- 
bination, as  the  health  is  often  marred  by  worry  and  anxiety.  It 
gives  success  in  life  through  matters  connected  with  horticulture,  and 
gives  ability  to  design  and  plan,  especially  in  architecture. 

THE    SUN    IN    ARIES    AND    MOON    IN    LEO 

I.-V.     (Sinister  Trine) 

This  combination  gives  remarkable  intuition,  a  very  affectionate 
and  warm  heart,  but  an  innate  sensitiveness  to  the  surrounding 
thought  sphere.  It  is  a  harmonious  blend  and  acts  more  upon 
the  feelings,  stimulating  the  heart  into  greater  activity,  the  brain 
feeding  the  heart  as  it  were,  this  causing  the  intuitions  and  spiritual 
aspirations  to  be  very  keen.  This  very  harmonious  combination 
gives  a  tendency  to  religious  thought,  clear  thinking,  and  correct 
mental  impressions.  The  metaphysical  is  easily  encouraged,  and 
there  is  a  certain  amount  of  originality  of  thought  and  action.  Ex- 
tremes in  affairs  of  the  heart  will  act  injuriously  and  the  health  would ' 


Digitized'by 


Google 


64  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

be  seriously  impaired  through  disappointments  in  the  love  life.  This 
position  brings  success  through  ambition  and  favours  all  matters 
connected  with  music  and  the  drama. 

THE    SUN    IN    ARIES    AND    MOON    IN    VIRGO 

I .  -  VI . — {Sinster  inconjunct) 

This  combination  stimulates  the  critical  and  discriminative  tend- 
ency of  the  Moon  in  Virgo.  It  exalts  the  practical  nature  and 
brings  out  all  the  scientific  characteristics.  The  solar  position  con- 
siderably improves  the  lunar  characteristics  and  makes  the  mind 
more  logical  and  more  accurate  in  its  judgments.  It  gives  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  ability  in  all  literary  pursuits,  but  also  awakens 
all  the  exacting  tendencies,  although  it  dispels  some  of  the  melan- 
cholic attributes  of  Virgo.  It  intensifies  the  expression  of  all 
studies,  and  gives  a  considerable  amount  of  musical  ability,  especially 
in  expression.  It  strengthens  the  love  of  chemistry  and  hygiene  of 
the  Virgo  nature  and  success  in  hydropathic  affairs.  It  often  gives 
greater  ability  than  there  is  opportunity  to  use  profitably.  Success 
comes  through  holding  some  servile  position. 

THE    SUN    IN    ARIES    AND    MOON    IN    LIBRA 

I.-VII.     {Opposition) 

We  have  now  reached  what  is  practically  the  opposition  of  the 
Sun  by  the  Moon ;  therefore  all  that  is  contained  in  the  Aries  nature 
may  find  its  expression  in  the  equilibrium  and  balance  of  the  sign 
Libra.  This  is  a  good  position  for  all  those  who  use  comparison, 
and  it  tends  to  bring  reflection  and  perception  to  a  state  of  balance. 
It  causes  a  keenly  sensitive  nature,  and  one  who  is  very  receptive  to 
the  surrounding  mental  atmosphere.  It  brings  out  all  matters  related 
to  music  and  the  fine  arts ;  gives  a  love  of  recognition,  and  benefits 
the  life  when  it  co-operates  with  others.  It  makes  those  bom  under 
it  good  counsellors  and  advisers,  and  fits  them  for  the  legal  profession 
or  all  matters  where  arbitration  and  judgment  are  required,  usually 
the  judgment  is  unbiassed  and  carefully  weighed.  This  position 
tends  to  bring  out  the  clairvoyant  faculties.  It  will  bring  some  fame 
or  recognition,  and  place  those  under  its  influence  in  prominent 
positions. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  65 

THE   SUN    IN    ARIES   AND    MOON    IN    SCORPIO 

I. -VIII.     {Dexter  inconjunct) 

This  is  not  a  good  combination,  the  niartial  element  being  very 
Strongly  marked,  increasing  the  passions  and  inclining  the  nature  to 
be  rather  hard,  dogmatic,  positive,  and  even  jealous.  It  causes  the 
life  principle  of  Aries  to  be  expressed  on  physical  lines,  giving  revolu- 
tionary tendencies,  and  making  those  under  its  influence  easily 
excited,  irritable,  angry,  and  revengeful.  In  cases  where  the  rising 
'  sign  indicates  it,  and  the  planetary  positions  are  favourable,  it  in- 
clines to  mysticism  and  the  occult ;  but  there  is  a  danger  of  psychic 
faculties  being  somewhat  abused.  Children  born  under  this  com- 
bination should  have  a  good  education  and  be  taught  to  be  less 
combative  and  forceful,  and  also  to  live  pure  lives.  This  is  not  a 
good  position  for  the  health.  It  favours  success  by  assertion  and 
aggressiveness. 

THE    SUN    IN    ARIES   AND     MOON    IN    SAGITTARIUS 

I.-IX.     {Dexter  Trine) 

This  is  a  very  good  combination,  the  fiery  triplicity  being  weH 
represented.  It  gives  a  very  quick,  sympathetic  and  inspirational 
nature,  but  a  tendency  to  go  to  extremes,  especially  in  physical 
matters*  .  There  is  always  a  certain  amount  of  restlessness  and  in- 
clination to  do  things  hastily,  especially  in  speech.  It  intensifies  the 
religious  inclinations.  It  strengthens  the  sincerity  and  btraightfor- 
wardness  of  the  personality,  and  gives  very  strong  tendencies  to 
prophesy  or  speak  unconsciously,  yet  accurately,  in  regard  to  the 
future.  It  gives  impulse,  some  exaggeration,  and  a  tendency  to  go 
to  excess.  This  combination  gives  some  skill  in  musical  perform- 
ance, and  fits  those  under  its  influence  to  become  good  teachers  or 
preachers.  It  is  good  for  travelling  and  exploration.  It  brings 
benefit  through  the  Church  and  religious  matters. 

THE    SUN    IN    ARIES    AND    MOON    IN  CAPRICORN 

I.-X.     {Dexter  Square) 

This  combination  gives  an  intense  love  of  fame.  The  Saturnine 
qualities  of  the  Moon  are  accentuated,  and  the  personality  made 
exacting  and  inclined  to  fluctuating  moods.  It  gives  remarkable 
imagination  and  splendid  ability  in  all  practical  methods  concerned  with 


Digitized  by 


Google 


66  ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL 

gaining  popularity.  This  combination  increases  the  inquisitiveness  of 
the  personality,  and  gives  a  very  determined  and  positive  nature 
Cleverness  is  much  appreciated,  and  persons  in  a  higher  rank  of 
society  are  sometimes  worshipped.  This  is  a  very  sensitive  com- 
bination, and  the  brain  is  a  very  receptive  one,  especially  to  the 
mental  conditions  of  others.  Tact  and  diplomacy  are  often  over- 
ridden by  impulse  and  self-assertiveness.  It  weakens  the  self-esteem 
but  increases  the  love  of  approbation.  It  causes  those  under  its  in- 
fluence to  aim  for  leadership,  and  to  rule  or  domineer  over  others. 
It  favours  uncommon  pursuits,  and  brings  success  through  force  of 
character. 

THE    SUN  IN  ARIES  AND  MOON  IN  AQUARIUS 

I.-XI.     (Dexter  Sextile) 

This  combination  gives  ability  to  study  human  nature.  It  brings 
out  all  the  pleasing  characteristics  of  the  Moon  in  Aquarius,  making 
the  personality  somewhat  original  and  at  times  eccentric.  It  inten- 
sifies the  artistic  and  enterprising  characteristics  and  gives  some 
ability  in  literary  matters,  a  bright,  clear'^mind,  well  able  to  express 
itself.  The  imagination,  intuition  and  mental  sensitiveness  are  much 
increased,  and  there  is  a  love  of  educational  and  scientific  work.  It 
intensifies  the  independence,  but  gives  the  ability  to  deal  with  others 
successfully.  Determination  and  enterprise  are  combined,  the  Aries 
nature  is  steadied  and  its  influence  made  very  reliable.  This  is  a 
fortunate  influence  in  all  matters  connected  with  associations,  public 
bodies,  local  governments ;  it  also  brings  help  and  assistance  from 
friends  and  acquaintances. 

THE  SUN    IN    ARIES    AND  MOON  IN    PISCES 

I. -XII.     {Dexter  Semi-sexttle) 

This  combination  is  not  altogether  a  harmonious  one,  the  action 
of  the  Sun  being  too  strong  for  the  lunar  position,  which  produces  a 
discontented,  restless,  and  often  worrying  nature.  But  ii  tones  down 
considerably  the  impulsiveness  of  Aries,  and  when  the  two  are  work- 
ing harmoniously,  it  increases  the  generosity  and  the  spirit  of  evolu- 
tion. It  gives  a  love  of  the  occult,  the  profound  and  mysterious,  but 
usually  much  sorrow  comes  into  the  life,  which  causes  those  born 
under  it  to  think  more  deeply  than  most  of  the  combinations  under 
Aries.     In  this  combination  the  personality  may  be  very  receptive  to 


Digitiz.ed  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  67 

all  the  impressions  coming  from  the  higher  nature ;  but  the  person- 
ality must  be  peaceful  and  harmonioiis,  otherwise  the  force  will  be 
too  strong  and  be  inclined  to  cause  the  Moon  to  receive  too  many  evil 
impressions.  It  gives  success  in  connection  with  public  institutions, 
asylums,  and  some  authority  in  a  quiet  and  unobtrusive  manner.  It 
is  also  favourable  for  ail  veterinary  work. 

THE   SUN  IN   TAURUS 

The  Sun  in  Taurus  will  make  the  individual  character  behind 
each  lunar  expression  more  firm,  plodding,  enduring  and  determined, 
but  there  will  be  a  tendency  to  move  slower  and  act  more  cautiously, 
quietly  and  practically  than  when  the  Sun  was  in  Aries.  We  have 
now  the  expression  of  the  Sun  from  the  exaltation  of  the  Moon, 
and  each  combination  will  tend  to  strengthen  the  personality  more 
than  the  individuality,  which  may  often  lay  behind  the  personal 
expression. 

THE    SUN    IN   TAURUjS   AND  MOON    IN   ARIES 

II.-I.     {Dexter  Semi-sextile) 

This  combination  gives  a  very  strong  personality.  There  is  a 
tendency  to  be  impulsive,  headstrong  and  rather  too  dogmatic.  The 
abilities  are  not  under-rated  and  there  is  a  considerable  amount  of  per- 
sistency, tenacity  and  exactitude.  There  is  plenty  of  reserve  power 
behind  all  the  force  that  is  expended,  and  when  those  born  under  this 
combination  make  up  their  minds  to  carry  out  any  purpose  in  life, 
they  nearly  always  succeed  ;  but  they  expect  a  great  deal  from 
others  and  manifest  a  stubborn  desire  to  make  others  conform  to  their 
requirements — the  moral  nature  is  usually  very  strong. 

This  combination  gives  success  in  life  through  energy  and  the 
desire  to  excel.  It  favours  enterprise,  the  spirit  of  daring  and 
all  matters  where  a  determined  will  is  required.  It  gives  good  con- 
structive power  and  the  ability  to  organise.  Prosperity  is  obtained 
through  perseverance. 

THE  SUN  IN  TAURUS  AND  MOON  IN  TAURUS 

II.-I  I.     (Conjunction) 

This  combination  gives  a  considerable  amount  of  determination, 
and  those  born  under  its  influence  are  not  easily  thwarted  in  their 


Digitized  by 


Google 


68  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

purpose.  They  possess  a  great  amount  of  self-control,  but  are  rather 
too  self-contained,  too  reserved,  and  often  secretive ;  but  they  are  re- 
markably strong  characters,  fearless,  persistent  and  hopeful,  possess- 
ing much  feeling  and  an  affectionate  nature.  They  easily  attain  to 
great  success  in  the  financial  world  and  appear  to  have  a  disregard 
for  finance  although  they  cannot  help  being  often  very  much  mixed 
up  with  it.  This  combination  is  the  most  practical  and  solid  of  the 
preceding  influences,  but  there  is  a  danger  of  becoming  too  obstinate. 
When  obedience  is  observed,  they  make  very  fine  characters.*  There 
is  a  tendency,  however,  to  become  too  self-centred,  and  too  reserved 
or  determined. 

THE  SUN  IN  TAURUS  AND  MOON  IN  GEMINI 

II.-III.     {Sinister  Semi-sextile) 

The  restlessness  of  Gemini  is  considerably  steadied  by  the 
Taurus  quality,  and  owing  to  this  there  is  less  diffusion,  and  more 
initiative  force ;  there  is,  however,  an  inclination  towards  despon- 
dency and  self-esteem,  which  is  due  to  some  superficial  tendencies 
that  have  not  been  eradicated.  Those  under  this  combination  are 
inclined  to  be  somewhat  selfish  and  apt  to  be  assertive ;  but  the  in- 
tellectual tendencies  give  them  good  abiHties,  giving  ability  to  write 
and  speak,  in  some  cases  the  powers  of  language  and  musical  ex- 
pression are  easily  developed.  It  is,  however,  not  a  very  harmonious 
combination,  and  usually  the  acquisitive  tendencies  are  very  large. 
Nervous  disorders  will  have  to  be  guarded  against,  and  temperance 
is  advisable. 

THE  SUN  IN  TAURUS  AND  MOON  IN  CANCER 

II.-IV.     {Sinister  Sextile) 

This  is  a  rather  negative  combination,  the  sensitiveness  oi 
Cancer  is  accentuated  somewhat,  and  the  emotional  nature  is  very 
easily  excited,  especially  in  matters  connected  with  the  home 
life.  This  combination  not  only  increases  the  sensitiveness  and 
sometimes  the  reserve  and  timidity,  but  it  also  produces  much 
economy  and  some  anxiety  with  regard  to  the  future  welfare.  The 
imagination  is  very  keen,  and  there  is  some  tendency  to  go  to  ex- 
tremes, especially  when  influenced  by  others.  This  combination 
sometimes  gives  inactivity,  and  increases  the  powers  of  sensation. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  69 

but  it  is  a  lucky  ot  fortunate  com  bin  ation,  giving  gain  thrQUgl^  pro- 
perty and  probably  inheritance. 

THE  SUN  IN  TAURUS  AND  MOON  IN  LEO 

II. -V.     (Sinister  Square) 

The  emotional  and  sensational  nature  is  much  increased  under 
this  combination ;  there  is  a  great  tendency  to  exaggerate,  over- 
estimate and  go  to  extremes,  also  to  be  easily  influenced  in  all 
matters  connected  with  speculation,. probably  to  gambling  and  sensa- 
tional pleasure.  The  affections  are  sometimes  easily  drawn  into 
unfortunate  channels,  and  there  is  very  often  a  tendency  to  express 
keen  likes  and  dislikes.  Care  will  be  necessary  to  avoid  over-indul- 
gence, especially  in  the  appetites,  which  may  become  abnormal  unless 
checked.  The  moral  nature  may  be  strengthened  considerably 
towards  the  close  of  the  life,  but  the  early  portion  is  often  one  in 
which  either  psychic  tendencies  or  sensations  play  a  very  prominent 
part.  The  affectional  nature  is  ardent  and  at  times  passionate  ; 
excesses  should  be  avoided.  There  is  some  poetic  ability,  the  iniagi* 
nation  being  very  vivid. 

THE    SUN    IN    TAURUS   AND    MOON    IN    VIRGO 

1 1 .  -  V I .     {Sinister  Trine) 

The  critical  faculties  are  accentuated  by  the  practical  Taurean 
nature  which  is  behind  the  personality,  and  this  combination  gives 
US  some  of  the  very  best  business  types  of  character.  In  all  busi- 
ness pursuits  they  are  very  persistent,  precise,  and  pronounced  in 
their  judgments.  This  is  a  very  successful  combination,  being  a- 
harmonious  blend  of  the  earthy  triplicity,  which  brings  out  all  the 
practical  tendencies,  and  Virgo  being  the  ruler  of  the  business  world, 
the  personality  has  here  the  opportunity  and  facility  for  expression. 
The  moral  nature  is  firm,  giving  much  conscientiousness  to  assist  the 
personal  character.  Behind  much  apparent  pHability  t)iere  is  a 
fixed  determination,  which  gives  great  success  in  life  in  all  business 
pursuits. 

THE    SUN    IN    TAURUS    AND    MOON    IN    LIBRA 

1 1.- VI  I.     {Sinister  Inconjunct) 

This  is  an  inharmonious  combination,  and  there  is  usually  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  bias  and  one-sided  judgment  in  the  Aature,  the 
blending  of  an  earthy  individuality  and  an  airy  personality  is  not 


Digitized  by 


Google 


70  ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL 

very  favourable*  It  tends  to  increase  the  separative  tendencies  and 
usually  causes  the  personality  to  arrive  at  faulty  decisions,  which  are 
often  the  result  of  another's  influence  in  the  life.  It  gives  a  certain 
amount  of  determination,  but  it  is  usually  of  a  stubborn  nature. 
Those  born  under  this  influence  are  apt  to  be  guided  by  their  feelings 
rather  than  by  their  reason.  There  is  likely  to  be  much  individual 
jealousy  and  vindictiveness  displayed,  especially  towards  strangers 
and  opponents.  The  personality  is  apt  to  be  very  affable,  agreeable 
and  more  refined  and  polished  than  the  individual  character,  but  the 
determination  that  is  behind  the  personality  will  often  carry  the  point 
where  either  merit  or  persuasion  has  not  succeeded.  This  combina- 
tion depends  very  much  on  the  planetary  positions. 

THE    SUN    IN    TAURUS   AND    MOON    IN    SCORPIO 

1 1. -VI 1 1.     {Opposition.) 

This  position  gives  a  certain  amount  of  vanity,  self-esteem,  and 
the  feelings  are  very  strong  and  intense.  There  is  much  reserve  and 
often  a  great  deal  of  secretion  and  concentrated  force.  A  good  edu- 
cation is  very  necessary  for  this  combination,  otherwise  there  is  a 
tendency  to  be  far  too  easily  influenced  by  environment  and  surround- 
ing conditions.  Pride  and  jealousy  may  cause  the  downfall  of  those 
who  are  born  under  this  combination  ;  but  there  is  always  a  con- 
siderable amount  of  determination  for  good  or  evil,  and  unless  the 
latter  is  restrained  the  nature  will  become  a  very  selfish  one.  Success 
in  life  will  come  through  persistent  determination  and  dogged  self- 
reliance  and  stubborness. 

THE    SUN    IN    TAURUS   AND    MOON    IN    SAGITTARIUS 

1 1. -IX.     {Dexter  Inconjunct) 

The  determination  behind  the  Sagittarius  personality  will  incline 
those  born  under  its  influence  very  greatly  to  go  to  extremes  in  all 
things.  It  gives  a  tendency  to  impulsive  action  and  hasty  speech, 
and  when  provoked  a  very  great  deal  more  is  said  than  is  probably 
thought  or  meant,  and  there  may  be  a  tendency  to  be  very  unkind 
and  argvunentative  when  put  out.  This  is  not  a  good  combination 
unless  planetary  positions  counteract  it,  the  personality  being  far  too 
impulsive  for  the  individual  nature,  but  there  is  aspiration,  and  a  love 
of  science,  also  a  tendency  toward  philosophy  and  religion,  which 
improves  the  nature. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL  7 I 

THE    SUN    IN    TAURUS   AND    MOON    IN    CAPRICORN 

(II.-IX.     {Dexter  Trine) 

This  is  a  very  practical  combination,  giving  caution  and  a  ten- 
dency to  make  very  careful  and  well-laid-out  plans  and  schemes. 
The  whole  character  is  very  independent  and  determined,  and  the 
ambitions  are  keen,  but  more  concerned  with  conservatism  and  conven- 
tionality, having  to  do  with  physical  objects  and  personal  surround- 
ings. This  is  a  very  successful  combination  of  the  earthy  triplicity, 
making  those  bom  imder  it  excessively  practical  and  well  able  to 
build  up  a  fortune.  They  are  especially  adapted  for  a  public  life,  or 
where  the  energies  are  put  to  good  uses  in  carving  out  a  prosperous 
career ;  they  will  possess  great  attainments,  aspire  to  reach  great 
heights,  are  filled  with  ambition  and  are  able  to  exert  the  personal 
for  the  purpose  of  achieving  physical  attainments.  This  gives  ability 
to  deal  with  big  schemes,  become  successful  organisers  and  to  carry 
out  huge  plans. 

THE  SUN  IN  TAURUS  AND  MOON  IN  AQUARIUS 

II.-Xl.     {Dexter  Square) 

This  is  a  practical  combination,  giving  thoroughness,  carefulness, 
prudence  and  caution,  with  a  considerable  amount  of  reserve.  It 
gives  honesty  of  purpose,  sincerity  and  refinement,  and  those  bom 
under  this  combination  are  able  to  concentrate  their  thoughts,  be- 
come very  industrious,  persevering  and  successful.  This  combina- 
tion tends  towards  eccentricity,  and  causes  those .  born  under  it  to 
become  very  self-centred. 

THE  SUN    IN    TAURUS  AND    MOON    IN    PISCES 

II.-XII.     {Dexter  Sextile) 

This  is  not  quite  so  unfortunate  as  the  combination  of  Sun  in 
Aries  and  Moon  in  Pisces.  It  steadies  the  mind  more,  gives  less 
inclination  to  restlessness  ;  but  in  some  respects  increases  the  com- 
bativeness.  Those  born  under  this  combination  are  very  hospitable, 
very  receptive  to  the  wants  and  requirements  of  others,  kind  and 
pliable  and  very  well  disposed.  This  is  a  fortunate  combination, 
and  success  comes  easily.     It  increases  the  mediumistic  tendencies 


Digitized  by 


Google 


^^  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

and  gives  receptivity  to  psychic  influences.     The  disposition  is  easily 
affected  and  inclined  towards  good  living,  peace  and  harmony. 

THE    SUN    IN    GEMINI 
III. 

The  Sun  in  Gemini  as  the  motive  force  behind  the  lunar  expres- 
sions will  give  a  dualistic,  restless  and  irritable  tendency,  with  the 
desires  always  running  on  intellectual  lines.  The  individual  character 
will  be  more  dualistic  in  its  expression,  and  there  is  less  permanency 
than  in  the  foregoing  solar  positions.  The  will  power  is  strong,  there 
is  some  pride  and  love  of  pedigree. 

THE    SUN    IN    GEMINI    AND    MOON    IN    ARIES 

III.-I.     {Sinister  Sextile) 

This  will  give  a  very  intellectual  nature,  and  make  those  born 
under  this  combination  fond  of  intellectual  pursuits,  studious, 
and  fond  of  expressing  their  thoughts,  but  there  is  a  danger  of 
the  personality  going  to  some  extremes  and  becoming  too  in- 
dependent, also  somewhat  too  changeable.  But  it  is  a  very  strong 
and  powerful  combination,  especially  in  all  intellectual  matters.  It 
gives  a  very  ambitious  spirit  and  strengthens  the  assertiveness.  The 
nature  is  a  very  positive  one,  and  somewhat  lacking  in  sympathy  and 
feeling.  There  is  a  liability  to  live  too  much  in  the  head,  this 
giving  danger  of  brain  troubles,  and  there  is  also  a  tendency  to  be- 
come erratic,  and  express  a  great  amount  of  self-will. 

THE    SUN    IN    GEMINI    AND    MOON    IN    TAURUS 

III.-I  I.     (Sinister  Semi-sextile) 

This  combination  gives  a  considerable  amount  of  sensitiveness, 
much  determination  and  firmness.  It  is  a  very  sensitive  combina- 
tion, and  causes  thefeehngs  and  ambitions  to  be  strong  and  powerful, 
owing  to  the  intellect  that  is  mixed  up  with  the  sensational  nature. 
There  is  apt  to  be  a  considerable  amount  of  energy,  and  perseverance, 
and  determination.  The  Gemini  characteristics  are  very  much 
strengthened  by  this  combination,  and  there  is  not  so  much  change- 
ability, restlessness,  and  irritability,  but  it  is  not  altogether  a  favour- 
able combination.  It  gives  gain  through  relatives  and  literary 
pursuits. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  73 

THE   SUN   IN  GBMINI   AND    MOON    IN   GEMINI 

III.-III.     {Conjunction) 

This  combination  indicates  a  considerable  amount  of  wilfulness, 
activity  and  restlessness,  and  a  tendency  to  measure  all  things  from 
an  intellectual  standpoint.  There  is  a  certain  amount  of  self-esteem 
and  independence,  and  the  feelings  are  not  so  active  as  in  the  other 
combinations  of  this  polarity.  The  motive  temperament  will  dominate. 
There  is  much  dexterity  in  all  matters  where  the  hands  are  employed. 
There  is  an  inclination  for  the  Moon  to  express  the  Sun  very  clearly 
in  this  combination,  giving  refinement,  artistic  tendencies  and  literary 
ability. 

THE    SUN    IN    GEMINI    AND   MOON    IN  CANCER 

1 1 1 . - 1 V.     (Semi'SextiU) 

This  combination  gives  a  strong  inclination  towards  economy 
and  thrift  in  the  home  life,  also  in  all  matters  concerned  with  the  wel- 
fare of  others,  but  it  is  a  very  sensitive  and  anxious  combination. 
There  is  likely  to  be  a  great  deal  of  travelling,  also  much  restlessness 
and  a  longing  for  sympathy  from  others,  but  the  artistic  and  imagin- 
ative faculties  are  well  developed.  The  receptive  nature  is  rery 
easily  affected  and  upset  by  surrounding  conditions.  This  position 
gives  success  in  all  matters  regarding  transit  and  public  affairs. 

THE    SUN    IN    GEMINI    AND   MOON    IN   LEO 

III.-V.     (SextiU) 

The  Leo  personality  suffers  by  this  combination,  as  there  is  not 
sufficient  firmness  in  the  background  to  support  the  Leo  indications  ; 
therefore  there  is  likely  to  be  too  much  impulse,  and  the  affections  are 
very  easily  moved.  The  imagination  is  active,  and  there  is  poetical  and 
dramatic  ability.  This  combination  gives  a  kind  of  weird  tendency, 
and  there  is  at  times  a  liability  to  hypochondria.  The  affections  are 
keen,  but  there  is  much  love  of  display.  There  is  some  literary 
ability  in  the  direction  of  fiction,  etc. 

THE    SUN    IN    GEMINI  AND    MOON    IN    VIRGO 

III.-VL    (Square) 

This  is  a  very  good  combination,  the  Mercurial  elements  coming 
out  very  forcibly,  inclining  the  mind  to  be  studious,  critical  and 
analytical.     It  gives  a  great  love  for  chemistry,  humanitarian  views^ 


Digitized  by 


Google 


74  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

and  inclines  to  the  study  of  the  laws  of  hygiene.  It  is  a  very  sensi- 
tive combination,  however,  with  regard  to  the  mind  ;  there  is  apt  to 
be  some  mistrust  and  melancholic  tendencies,  and  if  worry  or  anxiety 
be  given  way  to,  the  nervous  system  may  suffer  considerably.  Per- 
sons born  under  this  combination  may  obtain  great  benefit  through 
nursing  and  serving  others,  also  by  their  clever  criticism,  but  should 
avoid  irritability,  which  is  apt  to  mar  the  finer  qualities.  It  gives  a 
strong  will,  but  some  subtlety,  and  when  perverted  there  is  a 
liability  to  duplicity  and  indecision. 

THE    SUN    IN    GEMINI    AND    MOON     IN    LIBRA 

III.-VII.     (Trine) 

This  is  a  very  good  combination,  built  up  on  the  airy  triplicity. 
It  gives  much  refinement  and  a  sympathetic  nature  ;  it  also  increases 
the  intuitions,  gives  a  great  amount  of  foresight,  sharpness  to  the 
perceptive  faculties,  inclines  to  study,  gives  ability  for  public  writing 
and  a  great  amount  of  imitativeness.  It  is  necessary  for  those  born 
under  t.his  combination  to  live  purely.  The  faculty  of  comparison  is 
well  developed  and  there  is  some  probability  of  becoming  popular.  It 
gives  success  in  artistic  pursuits. 

THE    SUN    IN    GEMINI    AND     MOON    IN    SCORPIO 

II  I..  VI 1 1.     {Inconjunct) 

This  is  by  no  means  a  good  combination,  there  being  very  little 
harmony  between  the  common  and  fixed  signs.  It  accentuates  the 
critical  faculties,  which  are  rather  hard  and  severe.  There  is  a  ten- 
dency to  combativeness,  much  determination,  and  a  desire  to  pull 
down  without  rebuilding ;  it  gives  argumentiveness,  assertiveness, 
over-sensitiveness,  jealously,  pride,  and  self-esteem. 

THE    SUN    IN    GEMINI    APTO     MOON    IN     SAGITTARIUS 

I II. -IX.    {Opposition) 

This  is  not  always  a  good  combination,  owing  to  these  two  signs 
giving  too  much  activity  and  restlessness,  lack  of  continuity,  too 
much  force,  and  nervousness.  There  is  apt  to  be  waste  of  mental 
energy,  much  enthusiasm,  exceptional  force  of  character  and  a  great 
deal  of  excitement ;  the  personal  character  appears  to  be  far  in  excess 
of  the  individual,  but  the  higher  and  lower  minds  are  both  active, 
and  may  benefit  each  other,  the  lower  aspiring  for  light  by  devotion. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL  75 

THE    SUN    IN  GEMINI   AND    MOON    IN   CAPRICORN 

III.-X.      (Inconjunct) 

This  is  a  very  good  business  combination,  and  it  gives  Saturnine 
ballast  and  steadiness  to  the  Mercurial  tendency.  The  individuality 
is  quick,  but  the  personality  often  slow,  therefore  there  may  be  a  lack 
of  harmony,  but  by  labour,  perseverance,  and  patience,  a  great  deal 
of  good  work  may  be  done  by  the  personal  character  for  the  build- 
ing up  of  the  individuality.  This  combination  gives  mental  temper- 
ament, a  love  of  science,  some  tact  and  diplomacy,  and  often  much 
ingenuity. 

THE    SUN    IN    GEMINI    AND    MOON    IN    AQUARIUS 

III.-XI.     (Trine) 

This  is  a  very  good  combination  of  the  airy  triplicity.  It  gives 
a  great  deal  of  mental  and  physical  activity.  Those  born  under  this 
combination  are  good  character  readers,  also  good  students  of  meta- 
physics ;  they  are  able  to  get  along  very  well  with  strangers,  but 
should  always  avoid  excitement.  The  artistic  faculty  may  be  culti- 
vated. Success  will  come  through  co-operation  with  others,  also 
through  science  and  art. 

THE  SUN  IN  GEMINI  AND  MOON  IN  PISCES 

III.-XII.     (Square) 

This  intensifies  the  restlessness  and  causes  a  great  deal  of  irrita- 
bility, but  it  gives  a  great  desire  for  knowledge,  which  often  comes 
psychically.  There  is  frequently  a  great  deal  of  dissatisfaction,  a 
yearning  for  the  unattainable,  discontent  and  peevishness.  This  is  a 
psychic  combination,  producing  great  receptivity,  and  an  inclination 
to  dip  into  hidden  mysteries  ;  the  mind  becomes  very  receptive  to  the 
mysterious  and  weird  ;  it  also  gives  success  in  writing  strange  and 
uncommon  novels,  and  out-of-the-common  pursuits. 

THE  SUN  IN  CANCER 

IV. 

This  is  not  a  strong  position  for  the  individuality,  therefore  the 
personal  characteristics  may  pull  considerably  away  from  the  higher 
qualities.  Tenacity,  attachment  and  the  clinging  desire  for  objects  are 
very  marked.  It  makes  the  individual  character  exceedingly  sensitive, 
impressionable,  and  highly  emotional,  often  lacking  in  self-reliance, 


Digitized  by- 


Google 


76  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

and  giving  a  yearning  towards  feeling.  There  is  power  to  psycho- 
met  rise  and  sense  the  general  conditions  of  others.  It  gives  a  very 
tenacious  moral  character.  The  signs  of  awakening  will  be  shown  in 
activity  and  power. 

THE  SUN  IN  CANCER  AND  MOON  IN  ARIES 

IV.-I.     (Square) 

This  combination  gives  a  great  deal  of  activity,  much  persis- 
tency, a  liability  to  become  headstrong  and  go  to  extremes,  a  love  of 
fame,  ambition,  and  a  desire  to  lead  and  be  at  the  head  of  things. 
The  parents  may  affect  the  life  very  considerably.  There  is  a  great 
deal  of  impulse  in  the  personal  character,  which  will  bring  many 
sorrows  into  the  life.  Success  will  come  through  public  affairs  and 
fame  will  be  sought. 

THE  SUN  IN  CANCER  AND  MOON  IN  TAURUS 

IV.-II.     {Sextile) 

This  gives  a  considerable  amount  of  sensitiveness,  but  all  the 
higher  faculties  are  stimulated.  There  are  some  morbid  tendencies 
in  this  combination,  and  self-control  must  be  practised  before  success 
can  be  obtained.  This  gives  a  very  psychic  nature,  keen  intuitions, 
and  great  receptivity.  The  nature  is  imaginative,  impressionable, 
and  very  easily  affected  by  others.  Good  conipany  should  always  be 
chosen.  This  combination  makes  good  mediums  and  gives  the 
ability  to  psychometrise.  There  is  a  certain  amount  of  fortune 
attached  to  this  combination.  It  favours  the  sympathetic  tempera- 
ment. 

THE    SUN    IN    CANCER    AND    MOON    IN    GEMINI 

IV.-lll.     [Semi'Sextile) 

This  gives  a  personality  very  susceptible  of  education,  and  makes 
the  brain  exceedingly  sensitive  and  receptive  to  the  higher  part  of  the 
nature.  There  is  a  great  love  of  knowledge  and  a  great  deal  of  activity 
and  energy,  especially  in  literary  matters  and  travel.  Artistic  ten- 
dencies in  the  home  life  may  be  displayed.  Success  will  come 
through  the  help  and  assistance  of  relatives. 

THE  SUN  IN  CANCER  AND  MOON  IN  CANCER 

IV. -IV.     (Conjunction) 
Fancy  and   imagination  will  be  manifest  in  this  combination, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  77 

and  there  is  a  great  liability  to  go  to  extremes.  It  gives  independence 
and  conservatism,  or  a  clinging  to  ancient  customs  and  habits ;  there 
is  also  much  changeability.  Inertia  will  produce  laziness,  but  when 
other  planetary  influences  allow,  the  tenacity  and  motive  power  will 
be  great. 

THE    SUN    IN    CANCER    AND    MOON    IN    LEO 

IV.-V.     (Semi-sextile) 

This  combination  gives  very  keen  and  sensitive  feelings.  It 
awakens  the  animal  side  of  the  nature,  and  there  is  a  liability  to  gd  to 
extremes;  restlessness,  especially  where  love  is  concerned.  It  gives 
great  love  of  the  drama,  and  sometimes  a  love  of  sensation  and 
ardent  feelings ;  the  afFectional  nature  is  very  strong  and  loves 
romance. 

THE  SUN  IN  CANCER  AND  MOON  IN  VIRGO 

IV.-VI.     (SextiU) 

This  gives  a  very  sensitive  and  passive  nature,  with  a  certain 
amount  of  discrimination  in  all  matters  where  the  feelings  and  emotions 
are  concerned.  There  is  a  liability  to  go  to  extremes  and  to  worry, 
especially  where  business  matters  are  concerned.  The  nature  is 
receptive,  and  mediumistic;  at  times  there  is  a  liability  to  obsession, 
the  nature  being  very  receptive  to  psychic  influences. 

THE    SUN    IN    CANCER    AND    MOON    IN    LIBRA 

IV.-VI  I.     (Square) 

This  gives  more  balance  to  the  sensitive  and  emotional  nature  of 
Cancer,  and  increases  the  perception  and  affections,  particularly  in 
matters  connected  with  the  home  life;  it  stimulates  the  ideality, 
giving  harmony  and  balance  to  the  internal  feelings.  It  also  gives 
ability  for  writing,  and  a  love  of  coming  before  the  public  for  fame 
or  recognition. 

THE    SUN    IN    CANCER   AND    MOON    IN    SCORPIO 

IV.-VIII.     (Trine) 

This  combination  enables  the  personality  to  have  a  solidifying 
effect  [upon  the  sensitive  nature  of  Cancer,  making  it  harder  and 
sometimes  selfish ;  there  is  apt  to  be  much  vindictiveness  and 
jealousy  and  pride,  especially  in  matters  connected  with  the  feelings. 
It  gives  a  love  of  display  and  attracts  towards  the  opposite  sex  ;  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


78  ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 

magnetism  is  easily  stimulated  towards  sensation.     It  gives  success 
in  magical  and  psychic  affairs. 

THE  SUN  IN  CANCER  AND  MOON  IN  SAGITTARIUS 

IV.-IX.     (IncoHJunct) 

This  is  a  very  inharmonious  combination,  the  personality  being 
far  too  active  for  the  individuality,  but  it  stimulates  the  emotional 
and  devotional  nature.  It  gives  too  much  activity  with  regard  to 
speech,  a  restless  nature  and  a  constant  yearning  for  the  unattain- 
able. This  combination  gives  some  psychic  gifts  and  the  ability  to 
prophesy  and  bring  through  into  the  brain  dreams,  etc.  It  may  lead 
to  inspirational  speaking.  It  will  bring  success  from  foreign  affairs 
and  religious  matters. 

THE  SUN  IN  CANCER  AND  MOON  IN  CAPRICORN 

IV.-X.     {Opposition) 

This  makes  the  individual  character  more  practical,  more  am- 
bitious, and  gives  aptitude  for  business  and  practical  pursuits.  But 
it  gives  an  inability  to  express  the  internal  feelings.  Many  obstacles 
will  come  into  the  life,  but  the  ambitions  will  be  keen  and  there  will 
be  a  great  love  of  fame  and  a  desire  to  lead  and  govern. 

THE  SUN  IN  CANCER  AND  MOON  IN  AQUARIUS 

I V .  -  X I .     (Inconjunct) 

This  is  not  a  very  harmonious  combination,  but  it  gives  ability  in 
all  matters  connected  with  associations  and  some  degree  of  success  in 
public  life.  Persons  born  under  this  combination  are  apt  to  be  very 
tactful,  careful  and  diplomatic  ;  it  fits  the  life  more  for  externalities 
than  for  the  interior.  It  gives  ability  for  painting  and  some  artistic 
faculties.     The  eyesight  may  need  protection. 

THE  SUN  IN  CANCER  AND  MOON  IN  PISCES 

IV.-XII.     {Trim) 

This  is  a  very  harmonious  combination  of  the  watery  triplicity, 
awakening  the  emotional  nature,  and  making  the  mind  very  receptive ; 
it  gives  mediumistic  tendencies,  a  liability  to  hysteria,  much  fancy, 
and  a  desire  to  obtain  knowledge.  Psychic  faculties  may  be  developed 
and  there  will  be  an  interior  knowledge  of  the  public  mind  and  its 
requirements.     It  gives  success  in  Hfe. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY  FOR  ALL  79 

THE  SUN  IN  LEO 
V. 

The  Sun  in  Leo  gives  a  good  moral  nature ;  it  makes  the  indi- 
viduality very  sincere  and  ardent  in  all  matters  of  affection,  firm, 
self-reliant,  sincere,  magnanimous)  noble-minded,  austere,  and  de- 
termined. All  combinations  from  this  solar  centre  will  be  strengthened 
by  the  individuality.  Many  of  the  experiences  of  the  life  will  be  ,in 
connection  with  love  affairs,  and  matters  of  the  heart  and  inner 
feelings. 

THE    SUN    IN    LEO   AND    MOON    IN    ARIES 

V.-I.     {Trim) 

This  is  a  harmonious  combination  of  the  fiery  triplicity,  and  with 
the  Moon  ninth  sign  from  the  Solar  Centre  there  is  a  love  of  philosophy 
and  a  tendency  towards  religious  thought,  much  ideality,  determina- 
tion, and  love  of  being  leaders  and  at  the  head  of  things.  It  gives  a 
very  persistent,  dominant,  enthusiastic,  and  industrious  nature,  with 
much  combativeness,  though  the  combativeness  of  Aries  is  subdued 
by  the  Leo  influence.  There  is  a  necessity  for  restraint  where  feeling 
is  concerned.     It  gives  success  in  life. 

THE  SUN  IN  LEO  AND    MOON  IN  TAURUS 

V.-II.     (Square) 

This  gives  a  very  determined  nature,  with  an  inclination  to  put 
the  heart  into  physical  things.  It  strengthens  the  business  intuitions, 
gives  fortune  in  finance,  and  makes  good  bankers  and  stockbrokers  ; 
it  also  gives  a  love  of  hygiene,  and  a  strongly  vitalised  constitution. 
There  is  much  strength  in  this  combination  ;  the  character  becomes 
very  firm  and  at  times  obstinate. 

THE  SUN  IN  LEO  AND  MOON  IN  GEMINI 

V.-III.     (Sextile) 

This  gives  great  activity  to  the  personal  nature,  with  much  de- 
termination behind  it,  urging  the  lunar  tendencies  to  greater  activity, 
and  some  restraint  will  be  needed.  It  inclines  towards  music  and 
the  drama,  gives  abiHty  for  writing  and  poetry,  the  hands  being  ever 
ready  to  express  the  heart.  This  combination  makes  gifted  and 
clever  persons. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


8o  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

THE  SUN    IN  LEO  AND  MOON  IN  CANCER 

V.-IV.     (IncoHJunct) 

This  causes  much  sensitiveness  and  much  sorrow  in  the  love 
affairs.  It  also  gives  a  tendency  to  go  to  extremes  and  restraint  will 
be  necessary  in  sexual  affairs.  This  is  a  rather  good  oombination 
for  the  mind,  the  brain  being  receptive  to  influences  from  the  heart ; 
it  stimulates  the  love  emotions  and  makes  the  feelings  very  keen  and 
sensitive,  and  rather  too  ardent  and  attached  to  the  object  of  aflfec- 
tion.     It  gives  success  in  life  financially. 

THE   SUN    IN    LEO   AND   MOON   IN    LEO 

V.-V.     {Conjunction) 

This  gives  a  very  independent  nature,  and  makes  those  born  under 
it  rather  self-centred,  somewhat  proud,  but  very  kind-hearted  and 
generous ;  they  are  capable  of  holding  their  own  under  many  diffi- 
culties, but  there  is  a  tendency  to  go  to  extremes.  It  often  gives  too 
much  reserve  and  a  great  desire  for  affection  from  others.  This  com- 
bination gives  much  intuition,  and  ability  as  teachers  or  work  in  con- 
nection with  schools,  concerts,  pleasure  parties  and  amusements  of 
various  kinds. 

THE    SUN   IN    LEO   AND    MOON   IN    VIRGO 

v.- VI.     (Semi'sextile) 

The  Moon  is  in  the  first  house  from  the  Sun.  This  gives 
good  business  instincts,  chastity,  ideality,  but  a  tendency  to  be  very 
critical,  restless  and  anxious.  This  combination  gives  ability  for 
music,  literature,  chemistry,  hygiene,  and  many  subjects  where  the 
ideal  and  practical  are  blended.  It  also  fits  those  under  its  influence 
to  hold  responsible  subordinate  posts  as  head  servants  either  in  public 
or  private  life.     It  is  a  successful  combination. 

THE    SUN    IN    LEO   AND    MOON    IN    LIBRA 

v.- VI  I.     (SextiU) 

This  gives  much  intuition,  spiritual  inclinations,  a  love  of  class- 
ifying and  harmonising,  with  ability  to  foresee  the  future  by  the 
strong  intuitional  impressions  which  come  from  the  individuality.  It 
Strengthens  the  affections,  gives  compassion  and  a  desire  to  do  some 
public  good.     This  is  a  very  harmonious  and  successful  combination. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  8l 

THB   SUN  IN  LEO  AND  MOON  IN  SCORPIO 

V.-VIII.     {Square) 

This  combination  gives  much  love  of  show,  austerity,  an  inclina- 
tion to  be  rather  hard  and  at  times  proud  and  arrogant.  But  persons 
born  under  this  influence  have  very  often  their  internal  nature  hidden 
under  a  hard  exterior.  There  is  danger  of  going  to  excesses  in  love 
affairs,  or  where  sensation  is  concerned,  and  a  reckless  or  careless  life 
will  injure  or  disease  the  heart. 

THE  SUN  IN  LEO  AND  MOON  IN  SAGITTARIUS 

V.-IX.     {Trine) 

This  is  a  very  good  combination,  belonging  to  the  fiery  triplicity, 
but  it  gives  much  restlessness,  great  inclination  to  go  to  extremes, 
especially  in  religious  matters,  or  matters  of  the  heart.  The  Moo/i 
is  in  the  fourth  house  from  the  Solar  Centre,  therefore  in  perfect  har- 
mony with  it.  There  is  a  great  love  of  pleasure,  much  hope  and  joy 
in  the  nature,  this  being  a  hopeful  and  successful  combination. 

THE  SUN  IN  LEO  AND  MOON  IN  CAPRICORN 

V.-X.     {Inconjunct.) 

This  tends  to  harden  the  interior  nature,  giving  much  ambition 
and  exactitude.  The  personality  is  inclined  to  be  rather  grasping, 
selfish,  and  too  practical  externally,  but  inside  the  heart  is  always 
pulling  away  from  externals.  This  being  the  fifth  house  from  the 
Sun  the  circulation  is  apt  to  suffer.  It  gives  great  love  of  power  and 
leadership,  and  ^ability  to  organise,  govern  and  rule  others.  The 
ambitions  are  very  keen  and  determined. 

THE  SUN  IN  LEO  AND  MOON  IN  AQUARIUS 

V.-XI.     {Opposition) 

This  combination  is  equal  to  the  Moon  being  in  opposition  to  the 
Sun.  It  acts  as  a  seventh  house  influence,  causing  the  personality  to 
go  out  to  many  indiscriminately ;  it  gives  intuition  and  ability  to 
judge  human  nature  quickly,  and  some  very  marked  occult  tendencies. 
It  gives  refinement  and  much  determination  and  will-power. 

THE  SUN  IN  LEO  AND  MOON  IN  PISCES 

V.-XII.     {Inconjunct) 
There  is  very  little  harmony  in  this  combination,  as  the  brain 


Digitized  by 


Google 


82  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

is  often  negative  to  the  internal  feelings,  therefore  there  is  often  dis- 
content and  dissatisfaction.  There  is  some  tendency  to  occultism, 
mediumship  and  inspirational  speaking,  poetry  and  strange  writ- 
ing. The  nature  is  inclined  to  become  dreamy,  and  at  times  too 
passive. 

THE  SUN  IN  VIRGO 

VI. 

This  gives  a  practical  individuality  and  a  discriminative  nature. 
It  tends  to  lead  the  whole  of  the  lunar  expressions  more  into  practical 
methods,  where  the  discriminative  faculties  can  be  called  out  as  fully 
as  possible ;  it  also  connects  the  personality  with  maternal  and  family 
affairs,  the  home  instincts  being  strongly  marked. 

THE  SUN  IN  VIRGO  AND  MOON  IN  ARIES 

•  VI.- 1.     {Iwonjunct) 

This  gives  very  keen  mental  abilities,  and  tends  to  fit  one  to  take 
lead  in  any  business  affairs.  The  personality  is  mirthful,  witty,  active, 
sharp,  impulsive  and  quick  to  foresee,  but  the  solid  nature  of  the 
solar  influence  behind  it  enables  the  whole  combination  to  work 
harmoniously.  There  is  a  tendency  to  live  too  much  in  the  head, 
and  the  nature  may  be  somewhat  lacking  in  sympathy,  and  selfishness 
will  express  itself  when  the  will  is  thwarted ;  this  works  out  in 
sarcasm. 

THE    SUN    IN    VIRGO   AND    MOON    IN    TAURUS 

Vl.-II.     {Trine) 

This  combination  in  the  earthy  triplicity  brings  out  all  the  intui- 
tive faculties  and  strengthens  the  scientific  or  practical  ability, 
giving  keen  perceptions  and  fitting  those  imder  its  influence  to  be 
very  competent  in  the  business  world.  It  gives  nmch  receptivity  to 
the  surrounding  thought-sphere,  and  some  poetic  instinct.  This  com- 
bination will  give  some  reserve  and  secretion,  and  there  will  be  a 
tendency  to  be  over-cautious. 

THE    SUN    IN    VIRGO   AND    MOON    IN    GEMINI 

VI.-III.     {Square) 

This  quickens  the  speech  and  intellect,  giving  ability  for  and 
bringing  into  activity  all  the  mental  expressions,  but  belonging  to  the 
common  group,  there  is  often  loss  of  ppportunity  in  the  life,  arising 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL  83 

from  some  irresolution.  It  will,  however,  bring  those  bom  under 
this  combination  into  eminent  position,  which  may  or  may  not  be 
held.  Friendship  and  hospitality  are  marked  features  in  this  com- 
bination. 

THE    SUN    In    VIRGO   AND     MOON    IN    CANCER 

VI.-IV.     (Sextile) 

This  quickens  the  sensitive  nature  of  the  Moon  in  Cancer,  but 
it  also  awakens  the  anxious  side  of  the  nature;  it  stimulates  the 
activities  on  domestic  lines.  This  is  a  very  receptive  combination 
and  somewhat  over-sensitive.  It  gives  an  economical,  persevering 
and  industrious  nature,  with  very  strong  leanings  to  everything  per- 
taining to  the  home  life  and  family  affairs,  with  some  tendency  to- 
wards conservatism  or  sectarianism.  This  combination  increases 
the  economical  tendencies  of  Cancer. 

THE    SUN    IN    VIRGO   AND    MOON    IN    LEO 

VI. -V.     {Semi'Sextile) 

This  stimulates  the  affectional  and  emotional  nature  of  the  Moon 
in  Leo,  but  behind  the  personality  there  is  not  much  fixity ;  therefore 
there  is  anxiety  for  fresh  loves  and  there  will  be  many  love  episodes  in 
the  life.  This  combination  softens  the  critical  side  of  the  Virgo  nature, 
and  stimulates  the  psychic  side  of  the  solar  position.  Excess  of  feel- 
ing in  religious  matters  is  very  harmful  from  this  combination,  the 
imagination  being  very  keen  and  vivid. 

THE    SUN    IN    VIRGO   AND    MOON    IN    VIRGO 

V I .  -  V I .     (Conjunction) 

This  quickens  all  the  Virgo  nature,  giving  great  love  of  every- 
thing of  a  maternal  nature,  where  kindred  and  the  home  life  is  con- 
cerned. This  combination  increases  the  impressional  nature,  dis- 
crimination, independence,  self-reliance,  and  foresight,  but  there  is  a 
tendency  to  be  self-contained  and  somewhat  self-centred.  It  is  a 
somewhat  harmonious  blend,  but  both  luminaries  being  in  a  common 
sign,  there  is  a  tendency  to  be  methodical,  although  refined  and 
polished.  All  melancholic  tendencies  should  be  avoided,  and  the 
combination  may  produce  a  depressing  influence. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


84  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

THE    SUN    IN   VIRGO  AND  MOON    IN    UBRA 

VL-VII.     (Semi'SextUe) 

This  combination  gives  independence  of  thought,  ability  for 
writing,  philosophic  and  scientific.  It  quickens  all  the  perceptive 
faculties  of  Libra,  and  gives  great  ability  in  all  matters  where  fine 
judgment  and  perception  is  required.  It  strengthens  the  intuition, 
imagination,  ambition,  but  gives  a  very  clear  mentality,  etc. 

THE  SUN    IN    VIRGO   AND    MOON    IN    SCORPIO 

VI.-VIII.     (Sexiile) 

This  is  a  rather  selfish  combination,  inclining  one  to  be  hard 
and  somewhat  careless  as  to  the  feelings  of  others,  excepting  those 
of  their  own  family  or  those  who  minister  to  their  personal  com- 
fort. The  sympathies  are  not  very  keen,  and  jealousy  is  liable  to 
be  easily  aroused,  and  there  is  a  tendency  to  be  rather  unforgiving 
and  severe  with  wrong-doers.  Criticism  and  judgment  are  very  keen. 
This  combination  is  good  for  all  matters  connected  with  industry, 
persistency  of  character,  and  self-reliance  strengthens  the  Virgo 
nature  in  this  respect. 

THE   SUN    IN    VIRGO   AND    MOON    IN    SAGITTARIUS 

VI.-IX.     (Square) 

The  Moon  in  Sagittarius  tends  to  make  the  personality  inclined 
towards  philosophy,  very  intuitive,  with  a  strong  desire  to  teach 
others ;  but  there  is  a  tendency  to  be  too  impulsive  and  apt  to 
make  hasty  judgment ;  it  is  a  successful  combination,  especially  where 
the  acquisition  of  wealth  is  concerned.  Dual  tendencies  are  often 
found  in  this  sign,  such  as  religious  instincts  and  commercial  enter- 
prise, philosophy  and  love  of  power,  etc.,  etc. 

THE    SUN    IN   VIRGO   AND    MOON    IN  CAPRICORN 

VI.-X.     (Trim) 

This  is  the  most  practical  of  all  combinations,  and  while  there  is 
much  independence  and  a  tendency  to  lean  towards  materialistic 
and  selfish  lines  of  thought,  |there  is  splendid  ability  and  a  desire 
to  accumulate  wealth  either  in  the  professional  or  business  world 
This  combination  acts  similarly  to  the  conjunction  of  Mercury  and 
Saturn  in  nativities,  giving  shrewdness  and  a  calculating  mind. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  85 

THE    SUN  IN  VIRGO  AND  MOON  IN  AQUARIUS 

VI.-XI.     (Inconjunct.) 

This  intensifies  the  intuitive  faculties,  quickens  the  psychic  im- 
pressions, but  often  acts  along  practical  lines  and  gives  ability  for 
business  pursuits,  especially  in  trading  with  large  companies,  asso- 
ciations and  hmge  concerns.  The  discriminative  faculties  are  well 
developed,  and  there  is  much  ability  to  judge  human  nature.  This 
combination  also  gives  reserve  and  some  scientific  ability,  and  an  in- 
clination to  investigate  psychic  matters.  The  higher  side  of  the 
Virgo  nature  is  quickened. 

THE   SUN    IN    VIRGO   AND   MOON    IN    PISCES 

VI.-XII.     (Opposition) 

This  makes  the  personality  mediumistic  and  receptive  to  the 
requirements  of  the  individuality,  but  it  gives  restlessness  and  a  great 
love  of  change  and  novelty.  There  is  apt  to  be  much  dissatisfaction, 
also  irritability.  This  combination  is  not  favourable  for  the  health  ; 
it  also  gives  a  lack  of  self-reliance,  and  there  is  a  danger  of  being 
somewhat  superficial,  although  there  is  always  a  hospitable  nature 
displayed. 

THE   SUN    IN  LIBRA 

VII. 

This  gives  a  very  harmonious  individuality,  with  a  tendency  to  act 
through  perception  more  than  through  reflection.  The  spiritual 
qualities  of  the  sign  are  called  out,  and  the  higher  mind  seeks  to 
equalise  all  the  various  combinations  of  the  Moon.  There  is  a  keen 
love  of  justice  and  great  power  of  comparison,  but  there  is  also  a  cer- 
tain sensitiveness  in  this  sign,  and  very  ambitious  desires,  especially 
on  intellectual  lines  of  thought  and  action. 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA   AND    MOON    IN    ARIES 

VII.-l.      (Opposition) 

Reason  and  perception  are  well  blended  in  this  combination,  and 
there  should  be  a  great  amount  of  mental  refinement  and  much 
ability  in  all  mental  pursuits.  The  personality  is  active,  and  the  in- 
dividuality quiet.  The  will  power  is  fairly  strong,  but  there  is  liable 
to  be  some  head  troubles.  This  combination  is  likely  to  produce  an 
inharmonious  marriage,  few  being  able  to  respond  to  the  ideals  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


86  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

this  combination.  There  is  much  power  in  this  blend,  and  those 
possessing  it  can  obtain  much  influence  over  others.  Physically 
this  combination  is  very  good  for  all  who  love  athletics.  It  brings 
success  in  all  gymnastic  affairs,  the  spine  and  muscular  system 
being  very  supple. 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA  AND    MOON   IN   TAURUS 

VII.-II.     (Inconjunct) 

The  Venus  nature  is  well  harmonised  in  this  sign.  Persever- 
ance, endurance,  patience  and  caution  may  be  manifested  ;  there  is 
also  some  psychic  power  and  inventive  ability,  but  the  personality  is 
apt  to  be  somewhat  receptive  to  physical  surroundings  and  condi- 
tions; it  fits  those  under  its  influence  to  undertake  huge  building 
schemes.  The  combination  gives  gain  through  partners  or  through 
marriage. 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA   AND    MOON    IN    GEMINI 

VII.-III.     (Trine) 

This  is  a  harmonious  combination  of  the  airy  triplicity,  giving  re- 
finement, artistic  tastes  and  musical  ability.  It  gives  a  great  love  of 
knowledge,  intensifies  the  oratorical  and  intellectual  aspirations,  but 
also  gives  a  liability  to  go  to  extremes,  especially  in  mental  pursuits. 
Some  indecision  may  be  displayed,  and  a  want  of  stability,  but  this 
may  easily  be  overcome;  thought  and  feeling  are  blended  in  this  com- 
bination, which  gives  great  influence  over  others,  especially  in  matters 
of  speech. 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA   AND    MOON    IN    CANCER 

VII.-IV.     {Square) 

This  combination  on  the  cardinal  group  intensifies  the  sensitive- 
ness and  the  emotional  nature ;  it  gives  anxiety,  especially  with  re- 
gard to  home  affairs.  It  also  gives  some  changeability,  but  inclines  to 
progress ;  there  is  some  psychic  ability  and  inspiration,  which  may  be 
latent  owing  to  the  ambitious  tendencies  of  the  cardinal  signs. 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA   AND    MOON   IN    LEO 

VII.-V.     (Sextile)  . 

This  is  a  very  good  combination  with  regard  to  the  feelings  of 
the  personality,  as  it  intensifies  the  spiritual  and  refining  influences. 
It  tends  to  balance  the  individual  and  personal  nature  and   bring 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  87 

harmony.  It  gives  a  strong  inclination  to  spiritual  things,  and  some- 
times makes  the  nature  rather  too  idealistic.  There  is  poetic  and 
musical  ability,  and  either  the  artistic  or  moral  nature  will  have  many 
opportunities  for  development. 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA   AND    MOON    IN    VIRGO 

VII..VI.     {Semi-sextile) 

This  combination  gives  a  critical  personality,  which  is  softened 
considerably  by  the  powers  of  comparison.  It  gives  much  receptivity 
and  intuition;  it  tends  to  lead  the  mind  into  physical,  practical 
matters  and  gives  intuition  in  business  affairs.  It  is  a  refined  com- 
bination and  produces  an  attractive  personality. 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA   AND    MOON    IN    LIBRA 

VII.-VII.     (Conjunction) 

Although  this  gives  a  very  clear  perception,  it  is  not  a  very  good 
combination,  and  there  is  apt  to  be  too  much  reliance  upon  others  or 
inability  to  move  forward  on  their  own  initiative.  This  combination 
brings  dreams  and  the  power  to  see  visions.  It  is  good  for  the  disposi- 
tion, making  it  affable,  courteous,  obliging  and  well-disposed.  There 
is  much  foresight  and  mental  sensitiveness,  as  well  as  humani- 
tarian views  and  a  desire  to  do  good,  but  this  combination  is  very 
often  spoilt  by  a  self-centring  inclination  which  makes  the  idealism 
of  the  dreamy  order,  and  fails  to  accomplish  that  which  it  regards  as 
the  ideal.  Much  depends  upon  the  planetary  influences  as  to  how 
this  combination  will  act. 

THE   SUN    IN   LIBRA   AND    MOON    IN   SCORPIO 

VII..VIII.     {Semi-sextile) 

This  gives  a  love  of  approbation,  an  ambitious  nature,  and  makes 
the  native  fully  aware  of  his  own  abilities,  inclined  to  be  somewhat 
combative,  although  not  as  courageous  as  would  seem,  owing  to  the 
individuality  seeking  to  harmonise  and  soften  the  hard  positiveness 
of  Scorpio.  When  the  personality  has  the  greatest  power  there  will 
be  a  display  of  energy,  industry,  and  ambitious  tendencies. 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA   AND    MOON    IN    SAGITTARIUS 

VII.-IX.     (Sextile) 
This  is  a  very  good  combination,  although  the  personality  is 


Digitized  by 


Google 


8S  ASTROLOGY    FOR   ALL 

inclined  to  be  rather  too  reckless  and  careless,  over-active  and  ex- 
citable. It  intensifies  the  activity  of  the  brain  and  also  increases  the 
rapidity  of  speech.  This  combination  gives  prophetic  talents,  ability 
for  preaching  and  public  speaking,  and  in  many  pursuits  brings  suc- 
cess in  life. 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA   AND   MOON    IN    CAPRICORN 

VII.-X.     (Square) 

This  gives  some  musical  ability.  This  is  a  good  combination,  but 
the  mind  is  apt  to  be  too  practical  for  the  solar  influence,  leading  it 
into  the  external  world.  It  is  a  good  combination  for  popularity 
and  public  recognition » 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA    AND    MOON    IN    AQUARIUS 

VII.-XI.     (Trine) 

This  is  a  very  harmonious  combination  of  the  airy  triplicity.  It 
gives  power  to  psychometrise,  and  splendid  foresight,  especially  in  all 
matters  connected  with  humanitarian  principles,  large  businesses, 
associations,  and  public  companies.  It  gives  ability  to  judge  human 
nature  and  enables  the  mind  to  concentrate.  The  disposition  is  kind, 
gentle  and  humane. 

THE    SUN    IN    LIBRA   AND    MOON    IN    PISCES 

VII.-XII.     (Sextile) 

This  gives  a  great  deal  of  restlessness,  together  with  industry  and 
perseverance,  but  there  is  apt  to  be  much  tendency  to  dream  rathtr 
than  to  be  practical.  It  inclines  towards  mediumship,  which  is  always 
dangerous  with  this  combination ;  when  the  mind  is  occupied  in 
practical  and  physical  occupations  the  nature  is  improved. 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO 

The  Sun  in  the  sign  Scorpio  gives  a  very  firm,  determined,  and 
reserved  individuality,  with  inclination  to  be  very  dignified,  secretive, 
and  full  of  desire.  It  gives  pride  to  the  individuality.  Its  tendency 
is  to  give  much  self-control  to  each  of  the  lunar  indications ;  the 
individuality  may  be  very  well  disposed  or  very  selfish,  according  to 
progress.     Scorpio  is  a  sign  of  strength,  independence,  and  industry. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTRC»LOGY   FOR   ALL  89 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    ARIES 

VIII.-I.     {Inconjunct) 

This  gives  stubbornness  and  a  liability  to  go  to  extremes  of 
anger ;  also  much  jealousy,  impulse,  and  positiveness.  It  makes  strong 
characters  who  are  rather  dogmatic,  self-assertive,  and  full  of  very 
keen  likes  and  dislikes.  The  passional  nature  is  often  very  strong,, 
and  there  is  a  liability  to  become  rather  tyrannical,  and  too  forceful. 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    TAURUS 

VIII.-II.     {Opposition) 

This  is  by  no  means  a  good  combination,  although  the  lunar 
tendencies  will  be  to  reduce  some  of  the  positiveness  of  the  Scorpio 
nature.  It  makes  good  medical  men,  and  gives  remarkable  intuition 
or  instinct  with  regard  to  disease.  It  increases  the  approbativeness 
and  love  of  display  of  the  Scorpio  nature,  without  which  the  com- 
bination would  not  be  so  good.  It  gives  success  in  business  pursuits, 
and  a  very  firm  and  determined  nature. 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    GEMINI 

VIII.-III.     {Inconjunct.) 

This  is  by  no  means  a  good  combination,  as  the  personality  is 
inclined  to  great  extremes  and  is  easily  drawn  into  reckless  habits. 
It  gives  a  love  of  cleverness,  smartness,  and  shrewdness ;  it  makes 
very  good  critical  writers,  reviewers,  and  literary  critics.  It  is  not  a 
good  combination  for  the  health. 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    CANCER 

VUI.-IV. 

This  is  a  harmonious  combination  of  the  watery  triplicity,  but 
there  is  a  great  liability  to  be  easily  drawn  into  mistakes  through  the 
feelings  and  sensations,  and  those  under  this  combination  are  very 
easily  led  by  others  into  acts  of  folly.  Early  marriage  could  be 
recommended  for  this  combination,  the  powers  of  attachment  being 
very  strong,  and  the  life  may  thus  be  influenced  for  good. 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    LEO 

VIII.-V. 
This  is   an  inharmonious  combination,  inclining  the   mind  to 
romance  and  love  affairs  of  an  unhealthy  nature,  increasing  all  the 


Digitized  by 


Google 


go  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

passions  and  desires,  and  making  the  feelings  very  intense  and  very 
acute.  It  gives  pride,  some  arrogance,  and  much  love  of  power. 
The  emotions  are  very  keen  and  active. 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    VIRGO 

VIII.-VI.     (Sextile) 

This  is  the  most  critical  of  all  the  twelve  signs.  It  gives  literary 
ability,  a  great  deal  of  pride,  much  passion,  and  liability  to  become 
very  sarcastic  and  bitter  in  speech.  It  is  a  good  combination  for  a 
doctor  or  chemist,  or  one  who  is  inclined  toward  scientific  discoveries. 
Females  make  good  nurses.  Those  under  this  combination  may  be- 
come too  practical. 

THE    SUN    IN     SCORPIO    AND     MOON     IN    LIBRA 

VIII.-VII.     (Semi'sextile) 

This  gives  a  tendency  to  second  sight,  inclinations  towards  the 
occult  and  mystical,  the  love  of  all  that  is  psychic,  romantic  and  won- 
derful, and  leanings  towards  metaphysics,  mystical  brotherhoods,  and 
higher  thought.  A  great  deal  depends  upon  planetary  influences  as 
to  the  working  of  this  combination/,  in  some  cases  there  will  be  no 
occult  ability,  but  business  foresight  instead. 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    SCORPIO 

VIII.-VIII.     (Conjunction) 

This  combination  gives  much  self-reliance  and  independence,  in- 
clinations towards  materialism,  ability  to  govern  others,  but  always  a 
tendency  to  over-ride,  domineer  and  master.  It  gives  much  pride 
and  a  great  amount  of  reserve.  There  is  a  tendency  to  be  inquisitive 
and  search  into  hidden  secrets.  Those  under  this  combination  are 
well  able  to  assume  responsibility. 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    SAGITTARIUS 

VIII.-IX.     {Semi-sexHle) 

This  combination  gives  much  combativeness,  sarcasm,  explosive 
and  indiscreet  speech.  There  is  strong  impulse,  and  an  inclination 
towards  rash  conduct.  When  angry  they  are  terrifying.  There  is  a 
tendency  to  combine  occultism  and  religion. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  Ql 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    CAPRICORN 

VIII.-X.     (Scxtile) 

This  intensifies  the  pride  of  Scorpio ;  gives  strong  inclinations 
towards  self-indulgence,  but  a  great  amount  of  patience,  perseverance 
and  endurance.  It  inclines  towards  ambition  with  determination 
behind  it,  and  high  attainments  may  be  reached.  The  tendency  of 
this  combination  is  toward  materialistic  thought.  It  makes  capital 
dramatic  critics. 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    AQUARIUS 

VIII.-XI.     (Square) 

This  gives  ability  for  Government  employments  ;  a  tendency  to 
mix  in  large  concerns;  much  conservatism,  pride,  a  keen  desire- 
nature  ;  a  love  of  external  appearances,  wealth  and  grandeur  ;  there 
is  also  some  love  of  the  occult  and  mysterious. 

THE    SUN    IN    SCORPIO   AND    MOON    IN    PISCES 

VIII.-XII.     (Trine) 

This  combination  gives  a  very  restless  and  anxious  nature,  in- 
clined to  mathematics.  It  makes  mediumship  easy,  but  in  many  re- 
spects it  is  rather  a  weak  combination  for  the  morals. .  There  is  a 
tendency  toward  deception  and  duplicity. 

THE  SUN  IN  SAGITTARIUS 
IX. 

The  Sun  in  the  sign  Sagittarius  inclines  the  individual  towards 
science,  philosophy  and  religion.  It  gives  much  activity,  and  a  rest- 
less spirit,  but  also  one  who  is  frank,  honest,  sincere,  loyal,  and  a  lover 
of  liberty.  It  gives  a  tendency  to  prophecy  through  any  of  the 
twelve  signs  that  the  Moon  may  be  placed  in.  In  undeveloped  egos 
there  will  be  a  rebellious  and  dominative  spirit,  but  in  the  advanced 
souls  a  love  of  law  and  order. 

THE    SUN    IN    SAGITTARIUS   AND  MOON    IN    ARIES 

IX.:I.     (Trine) 

This  is  a  combination  of  the  fiery  triplicity.  It  intensifies  the 
activity,  but  inclines  the  mind  to  be  always  rushing  out  impulsively  ; 
this  is  apt  to  give  exactitude,  and  discontent ;  much  restraint  is  needed, 
otherwise  excitability  will  be  expressed  and  too  much  mental  energy. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


92  ASTROLOGY  FOR  ALL 

There  will  be  great  desire  to  excel,  and  sometimes  over-reach ;  the 
passional  nature  is  often  active,  and  the  personality  is  very  strong  and 
tends  to  over-ride  restraint. 

THE    SUN    IN    SAGITTARIUS   AND    MOON    IN    TAURUS 

IX.-II.     (Inconjunct) 

This  is  a  sympathetic  combination  and  the  reserve  of  Taurus, 
etc.,  lessens  the  impulsiveness  of  Sagittarius,  expands  the  sympathies 
and  also  gives  more  stability  to  the  foresight  which  is  nearly  always 
reliable.  It  is  a  fortunate  combination  for  worldly  success,  the  fore- 
sight of  Sagittarius  being  used  for  practical  ends. 

THE   SUN    IN    SAGITTARIUS   AND    MOON    IN    GEMINI 

IX.-III.     {Opposition) 

This  combination  quickens  the  activities  of  Sagittarius.  It  gives 
a  liability  to  become  hasty  in  speech,  over  excited,  and  too  active.  It 
gives  a  love  of  education,  but  there  are  many  obstacles  in  the  life  to 
overcome.  It  inclines  to  a  highly  nervous  condition  which  may 
induce  nervous  disorders  or  consumptive  tendencies.  It  favours  the 
motive  temperament  and  gives  a  love  of  travel. 

THE  SUN  IN  SAGITTARIUS  AND  MOON  IN  CANCER 

IX.-IV.     {Inconjunct) 

This  is  by  no  means  a  harmonious  combination,  fire  and  water 
not  being  agreeable  combinations,  and  many  mistakes  are  apt  to  be 
made  in  life  through  the  sympathetic  impulsiveness  of  the  individu- 
ality which  is  easily  expressed  through  the  personal,  emotional, 
psychic  and  imaginative  characteristics  of  Cancer.  It  gives  intuition 
and  confers  the  gift  of  prophecy  and  true  dreaming,  but  inclines 
toward  sensation. 

THE    SUN    IN    SAGITTARIUS   AND    MOON    IN    LEO 

IX.-V.     (Trine) 

This  is  a  splendid  combination  of  the  fiery  triplicity  ;  it  awakens 
either  the  passional  or  the  spiritual  side  of  the  nature,  the  latter 
giving  great  ability  to  foresee  the  future  and  to  prophecy.  It  tends 
to  make  the  mind  very  proud,  quick  and  alert,  with  the  ability  to 
sense  other  minds.  This  is  the  most  affectional  combination  of  this 
group,  the  heart  being  very  active.  The  love  nature  can  go  out  to 
many,  but  there  is  apt  to  be  much  confusion  in  this  combination. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  93 

THE   SUN    IN   SAGITTARIUS   AND   MOON   IN   VIRGO 

IX..VL     (Square) 

This  gives  excellent  discriminative  powers ;  intuition  ;  language ; 
refinement ;  love  of  harmony,  abiljty  to  intellectually  foresee  with 
regard  to  material  things.  The  higher  mind  is  active  and  tends  to 
make  the  personality  critical,  but  bright  and  clear  in  thought  and 
speech. 

THE  SUN    IN   SAGITTARIUS   AND  MOON   IN   LIBRA 

IX..VII.     (SexHle) 

In  this  combination  the  personal  characteristics  tend  to  equalize 
and  modify  the  impulse  of  Sagittarius.  This  combination  awakens  the 
ambitions  and  gives  a  fairly  strong  personality.  It  gives  very  quick 
and  accurate  perception  and  powers  of  comparison  and  equilibrium. 
It  also  gives  some  refinement,  artistic  and  musical  ability. 

THE  SUN  IN  SAGITTARIUS  AND  MOON  IN  SCORPIO 

IX.- VII  I.     (Semi'SextUe) 

This  is  a  good  combination,  the  martial  Jupiterian  influence  pre- 
dominating. There  is  apt  to  be  much  sarcasm  in  speech;  pride, 
much  temper,  combativeness,  impetuosity  ;  but  where  the  mind  is  led 
into  the  occult  great  attainments  may  be  made.  It  gives  much 
perseverance  and  persistence,  plenty  of  energy  and  a  desire  for  in- 
dependence. 

THE  SUN  IN  SAGITTARIUS   AND  MOON  IN  SAGITTARIUS 

IX.- IX.     (Conjunction) 

This  combination  gives  too  much  independence,  too  much  free- 
dom, and  a  tendency  to  become  reckless  and  rebellious,  while  at  the 
same  time  there  are  some  conservative  tendencies.  It  quickens  the 
mental  and  physical  powers.  Sagittarius  |is  well  expressed  by  this 
combination,  bringing  out  the  love  of  travel,  science,  philosophy,  and 
religion. 

THE    SUN    IN    SAGITTARIUS  AND    MOON    IN    CAPRICORN 

IX.-X.     (Semi'ScxtiU) 

The  personal  characteristics  steady  the  individuality  and  give 
musical  ability  ;  it  awakens  the  personal  nature  into  greater  activity, 
giving  ambition  in  matters  of  higher  thought,  etc.     There  is  some 


Digitized  by 


Google 


94.  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

liability  to  changeableness,  but  the  mind  is  industrious  and  practical, 
though  often  very  sensuaL  This  combination  gives  influence  in 
religious  matters* 

THE  SUN  IN  SAGITTARIUS  AND  MOON  IN  AQUARIUS 

IX.-XI.     {Sextile) 

This  quickens  the  intuitions,  gives  ability  to  deal  with  the  multi- 
tude, associations  and  public  bodies,  but  there  is  a  liability  to  over- 
exertion. It  is  a  good- combination  for  commercial  life,  or  where  the 
personality  comes  prominently  before  others. 

THB  SUN  IN  SAGITTARIUS  AND  MOON  IN  PISCES 

IX.-XII.     (Square) 

This  combination  gives  too  much  anxiety,  restlessness  and  inclin- 
ation to  worry,  but  causes  the  prophetic  nature  to  come  through  the 
personality  when  it  is  restful  and  mediumistically  inclined.  It  gives 
a  religious  tendency  and  an  inclination  to  be  charitable,  but  there  is 
a  lack  of  initiative,  and  work  is  best  carried  out  when  under  the 
direction  of  others.     It  is  not  a  good  combination  for  the  health. 

THE    SUN    IN    CAPRICORN 

X. 

This  gives  a  very  ambitious  individuality,  possessing  much  inde- 
pendence, noLuch  strength  of  character,  keen  love  of  justice  and  a 
desire  to  attain  to  the  highest  position  possible.  There  is  much 
self-reliance  and  determination  expressed  through  this  sign,  which 
considerably  strengthens  the  various  personalities  attached  to  it. 

THE   SUN    IN    CAPRICORN   AND   MOON    IN   ARIES 

X.-I.     (Square) 

This  gives  much  ambition,  a  desire  to  be  at  the  head  of  every- 
thing, much  determination,  independence,  and  self-assertion,  with 
egotistical  tendencies.  It  quickens  all  the  Aries  vibrations,  giving 
an  intense  love  of  music.  It  brings  the  native  into  prominence^ 
especially  in  governmental  affairs  or  where  great  responsibility  is 
required. 

THE   SUN    IN   CAPRICORN   AND   MOON    IN   TAURUS 

X.-II.     (Trine) 
This  gives  a  very  persistent  mind,  much  firmness  and  self-control, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  95 

a  deske  to  elevate  and  improve  others,  with  a  certain  amount  of  con- 
servatism. It  is  the  most  practical  of  this  set  of  combinations,  giving 
ability  to  acquire  wealth  and  the  power  to  do  good  with  it. 

THB   SUN   IN   CAPRICORN   AND   MOON    IN    GEMINI 

X.-III.     (Incanjunct) 

The  steady  carefulness  behind  the  activity  of  Gemini  causes  this 
cbmbination  to  be  studious,  and  very  much  inclined  to  give  expression 
to  the  thoughts  behind  the  personality.  This  combination  is  good  for 
ambassadors,  scientific  writers,  and  speakers. 

THE   SUN   IN   CAPRICORN   AND   MOON   IN   CANCER 

X.-IV.     {Opposition) 

This  increases  the  sensitiveness  of  Cancer,  gives  a  strong  inclina- 
tion towards  economy,  thrift,  and  prudence,  but  also  a  certain  amount 
of  selfishness.  There  is  a  love  of  change  and  a  desire  for  high  attain- 
ments in  the  physical  world.  It  gives  a  love  of  economy,  much 
tenacity,  and  the  desire  to  travel. 

THE    SUN     IN    CAPRICORN     AND     MOON    IN    LEO 

X.-V.     (Incanjunct) 

This  is  not  a  very  harmonious  combination,  the  personal  tenden- 
cies being  towards  aflfection,  against  the  internal  ambitious  instincts^ 
But  conjugality  could  be  well  expressed  by  this  combination.  There 
is  a  love  of  ostentation  and  display ;  the  ideals  are  very  high  with  re- 
gard to  the  surroundings. 

THE   SUN    IN    CAPRICORN    AND    MOON     IN    VIRGO 

X.-VI.     (Trine) 

This  is  an  excellent  combination  of  the  earthy  triplicity,  the 
critical  and  analytical  tendencies  of  Virgo  being  considerably  softened 
by  the  meditative  and  contemplative  Cap)ricorn  nature.  It  gives 
splendid  ability  to  judge  and  criticise,  and  intensifies  the  discrimina- 
tive faculties,  giving  ability  for  literary  employments. 

THE    SUN    IN    CAPRICORN    AND    MOON    IN    LIBRA 

X.-VII.     (Square) 

The  well-balanced  brain  of  the  personal  indications  of  Libra  will 
have  behind  it  the  careful  thoughtfulness  of  Capricorn,  which  will 
^ve  splendid  intuition,  comparison,  careful  foresight  and  a  love  of 


Digitized  by 


Google 


96  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

the  metaphysical.     This  combination  gives  a  love  of  popularity  and 
desire  for  fame. 

THB  SUN  IN  CAPRICORN  AND  MOON  IN  SCORPIO 

X.-VII.     {Sexiile) 

This  is  by  no  means  a  good  combination,  giving  much  secrecy, 
tact,  and  diplomacy.  It  intensifies  the  selfishness  and  hardness  of 
the  Scorpio  nature.  It  is  the  combination  that  would  make  a  good 
surgeon,  soldier  or  military  leader;  it  tends  towards  materialistic 
thought,  increases  the  anger  and  gives  some  revolutionary  feelings. 

THB   SUN   IN   CAPRICORN  AND   MOON   IN  SAGITTARIUS 

X.-IX.     (Semi'SextiU) 

This  is  not  a  harmonious  combination,  but  the  practical  nature 
of  Capricorn  will  steady  down  the  recklessness  and  impulsiveness  of 
Sagittarius  and  will  make  the  execution  better.  It  is  a  good  combina- 
tion for  explorers  and  it  gives  much  reHgious  ambition. 

THE    SUN    IN    CAPRICORN    AND    MOON    IN    CAPRICORN 

X.-X.     {Conjunction) 

This  gives  a  very  thoughtful  character,  with  some  inclination  to 
despondency.  There  is  apt  to  be  too  much  independence  at  times, 
isolation,  with  a  desire  to  live  a  life  of  loneliness.  The  feelings  are 
ndt  expansive,  and  there  is  a  tendency  to  retire  inward  far  more  than 
is  good  for  the  character.  It  gives  good  businei^G  ability,  and  makes 
the  nature  acquisitive  and  somewhat  self-centred. 

THE    SUN    IN    CAPRICORN    AND    MOON    IN    AQUARIUS 

X.-XI.     {Semi-sextile) 

This  gives  splendid  organising  ability,  with  success  in  huge  and 
gigantic  undertakings,  public  companies,  etc.  It  quickens  the  per- 
ceptions, gives  intuition  and  the  ability  to  read  character  accurately. 
Much  progress  is  made  in  life  through  careful  forethought. 

THE   SUN   IN    CAPRICORN   AND   MOON    IN    PISCES 

X.-XII.    (ScxtiU) 
This  is  rather  an  unhappy  combination  and  gives  much  anxiety, 
with  desires  toward    economy  and  frugality.      In  some   natures   it 
gives  perseverance  and  industry,  and  a  great  desire  for  knowledge, 
but  with  others  the  personality  is  indolent,  easy-going  and  careless. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  97 

THE    SUN    IN    AQUARIUS 

The  Sun  in  Aquarius  gives  a  very  refined  individuality,  loving 
everything  of  a  humanitarian  nature,  very  faithful,  sincere,  humane 
and  just,  with  very  broad  sympathies  and  a  desire  to  embrace  the 
whole  of  humanity.  The  individuality  will  be  active  in  awakened  souls, 
but  in  the  younger  members  of  the  race  it  will  not  be  manifest,  and  the 
personality  will  act  as  though  no  individuality  were  behind  it. 

THE    SUN    IN    AQUARIUS   AND    MOON    IN    ARIES 

XI.-I.     (Sextile) 

This  gives  a  very  firm  character,  quiet,  and  not  very  expressive, 
but  with  real  perceptive  ability,  capable  of  judging  human  character, 
persevering  in  nature,  but  liable  at  times  to  go  to  extremes  in  action, 

THE  SUN  IN  AQUARIUS  AND  MOON  IN  TAURUS 

XI.-II.     (Square) 

This  makes  an  excellent  character  reader,  human  nature  being 
well  developed.  It  inclines  to  be  practical  in  all  its  manifestations 
faithful,  sincere,  firm,  just  and  reliable. 

THE   SUN    IN    AQUARIUS   AND    MOON    IN    GEMINI 

XI.-III.     {Trine) 

This  combination  belongs  to  the  airy  triplicity.  It  intensifies 
all  the  intellectual  qualities,  giving  oratorical  power,  a  studious 
mind,  well  adapted  for  all  literary  pursuits.  This  combination  gives 
industry,  neatness,  and  perfection  in  regard  to  details. 

THE    SUN    IN    AQUARIUS   AND    MOON    IN    CANCER 

XI.-IV.     (Inconjunct) 

This  is  not  a  very  harmonious  combination.  It  intensifies  the 
economical  tendencies  of  Cancer,  and  gives  firmness  with  regard  to  all 
matters  of  a  domestic  nature.  It  awakens  the  sensitiveness  of  Cancer 
and  gives  intuition  with  regard  to  persons  with  whom  there  is  much 
attachment. 

THE  SUN  IN  AQUARIUS  AND  MOON  IN  LEO 

XI.-V.     {Opposition) 

This  intensifies  the  love  nature  and  gives  a  strong  desire 
to  become  devoted  to  one ;  there  is  an  inclination  to  worship  those 


Digitized  by 


Google 


98  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

who  are  loved.     This  is  rather  a  peculiar  combination,  giving  psychic 
ability  and  the  power  to  psychometrise. 

THE    SUN  IN  AQUARIUS  AND  MOON  IN  VIRGO 

XI. -VI.     (Inconjunct) 

This  considerably  improves  the  characteristics,  intensifying  the 
love  of  hygiene,  giving  neatness,  precision,  carefulness,  and  awaken- 
ing all  the  critical  faculties.  It  gives  prudence,  practicality,  business 
ability,  love  of  science  and  intellectual  pursuits. 

THE  SUN  IN  AQUARIUS   AND  MOON  IN  LIBRA 

XI.-VII.     {Trine) 

This  is  a  very  fine  combination  of  the  airy  triplicity.  It  gives 
splendid  powers  of  judgment,  remarkable  perception,  a  very  intuitive 
nature  and  much  foresight.  It  awakens  the  spiritual  side  of  the 
nature,  giving  balance  and  equilibrium  to  the  internal  perceptions. 
Success  in  marriage  is  indicated  in  this  combination. 

THE  SUN  IN    AQUARIUS  AND  MOON  IN  SCORPIO 

XI.-VIII.     {Square) 

This  is  by  no  means  a  good  combination,  the  Scorpio  nature  not 
being  in  harmony  with  the  Aquarian.  It  inclines  to  make  the  nature 
rather  hard  and  revengeful,  somewhat  over-grasping,  too  self-reliant, 
and  somewhat  worldly  selfish. 

THE  SUN  IN  AQUARIUS  AND   MOON  IN  SAGITTARIUS 

XI.-IX. 

This  combination  makes  the  personality  rather  too  quick  for  the 
slow,  steady  individuality,  but  it  adds  a  little  more  concentrativeness 
to  the  impulsive  nature  of  Sagittarius.  There  is  apt  to  be  much  im- 
pulse in  speech  and  inclination  to  be  rather  abrupt.  It  gives  religious 
or  psychic  tendencies. 

THE    SUN     IN     AQUARIUS    AND    MOON    IN    CAPRICORN 

XI. -X.     {Semi'Sextilc) 

This  combination  makes  the  personality  very  shrewd,  tactful, 
ambitious  and  eager  to  attain  to  great  heights,  which  are  often 
reached  through  favouritism  and  the  help  of  friends.  There  is  much 
solidity  of  thought  and  abiHty  for  political  matters. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  99 

THE    SUN    IN    AQUARIUS    AND     MOON    IN     AQUARIUS 

XI.-XI,     (Conjunction) 

This  combination  is  good  for  the  individuality,  giving  much  re- 
finement, a  great  deal  of  discretion,  discrimination,  and  careful 
thought.  It  intensifies  the  clearness  and  brightness  of  the  Aquarian 
intellect,  and  tones  down  the  self-centring  of  the  luminaries  in  the 
same  sign. 

THE    SUN    IN   AQUARIUS   AND    MOON    IN    PISCES 
XI.-XII. 

This  is  not  so  bad  a  combination  as  the  other  Pisces  natures,  as 
it  gives  much  perseverance,  carefulness,  and  awakens  the  studious  side 
of  the  Pisces  nature,  but  much  will  depend  upon  planetary  influences 
with  regard  to  this  combination. 

THE  SUN    IN    PISCES 

XII. 

The  Sun  in  the  sign  Pisces  tends  to  make  the  individual  nature 
emotional  and  receptive,  meditative  and  imitative.  This  is  not  the 
strongest  of  the  twelve  signs,  but  it  gives  a  very  deep  internal  nature, 
with  strong  inclinations  towards  occult  development.  There  are  two 
types  of  individuals  under  the  sign  Pisces,  the  developed  and  unde- 
veloped. 

THE    SUN  IN    PISCES   AND    MOON  IN    ARIES 

X 1 1 .  - 1 .     (Semi'Sextile) 

This  combination  considerably  strengthens  the  individual  char- 
acter, adds  more  force  and  energy  to  the  Pisces  sign,  and  gives  more 
self-reliance,  but  at  the  same  time  wilfulness  and  a  tendency  to  be 
more  easily  led  than  driven. 

THE    SUN    IN    PISCES   AND    MOON    IN    TAURUS 

(Sextile) 

This  intensifies  the  negative  nature  of  this  combination  ;  it  gives 
a  considerable  amount  of  sensitiveness,  and  a  great  love  of  the  occult. 
The  firmness  of  Taurus  strengthens  the  vacillation  of  Pisces,  and 
makes  a  kind,  quiet  and  pleasapt  nature.  There  is  a  love  of  money 
indicated, 


Digitized  by 


Google 


100  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

THE   SUN    IN    PISCES   AND    MOON    IN    GEMINI 

XII.-III.     (Square) 

This  combination  gives  vacillation,  a  tendency  to  worry  and  lack 
of  continuity  or  fixity  of  purpose ;  a  great  deal  of  indecision  and  an 
inclination  to  restless,  over-active  mentality.  It  becomes  rather 
fanciful,  easily  affected  by  the  moods  of  others. 

THE    SUN    IN    PISCES   AND    MOON    IN    CANCER 

XII.-IV.     {Trine) 

This  intensifies  the  imaginative  and  sensitive  nature  of  Cancer, 
increases  the  economy,  also  the  receptivity.  It  is  one  of  the  psychical 
combinations,  awakening  the  psychic  faculties.  The  emotional  nature 
is  very  keen,  but  not  lacking  in  reflection. 

THE    SUN  IN    PISCES   AND  MOON    IN    LEO 

XII.-V.     (Inconjunct) 

This  is  an  inharmonious  combination,  so  far  as  the  physical 
world  is  concerned,  as  it  gives  a  continual  yearning  for  the  unattain- 
able, or  for  something  that  seems  far  beyond  physical  realisation.  It 
inclines  very  much  to  the  occult  and  metaphysical,  giving  a  love  of 
everything  that  is  romantic,  weird  and  mysterious.  It  is  an  unfor- 
tunate combination,  often  placing  those  under  its  influence  in  posi- 
tions they  cannot  maintain,  making  them  erratic  and  liable  to  varying 
moods. 

THE    SUN  IN    PISCES    AND    MOON    IN    VIRGO 

XII.-VI.     {Opposition) 

Pisces  is  considerably  improved  by  this  combination.  The  in- 
tuition is  active,  and  the  critical  nature  of  Virgo  has  behind  it  much 
inspiration.  Much  may  be  done  in  a  quiet  way.  It  is  a  combination 
giving  a  steady  and  useful  disposition. 

THE    SUN    IN    PISCES    AND    MOON    IN    LIBRA 
XII.-VII. 

This  gives  an  equable  tendency  to  the  personality,  and  in- 
clines one  to  all  inspirational  and  spiritual  things,  giving  the  ability 
to  weigh  up  and  balance  the  internal  sense  of  things  of  Pisces, 
It  strengthens  the  peraeptions  of  the  Pisces  nature. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL  lOI 

THE     SUN     IN     PISCES    AND     MOON     IN     SCORPIO 

XIL-VIII.     (Trine) 

This  is  by  no  means  a  good  combination,  although  belonging  to 
the  watery  triplicity.  The  Scorpio  nature  is  rather  too  hard  and  sel- 
fish. It  brings  misfortunes  into  the  life,  and  it  makes  those  under  its 
influence  inclined  to  be  more  jealous,  as  in  this  respect  it  is  a  com- 
bination more  easily  affected  by  others.  There  are  apt  to  be  some 
morbid  inclinations  and  many  acts  of  indiscretion.  In  some  horo- 
copies  it  indicates  treachery. 

THE     SUN     IN    PISCES     AND     MOON     IN     SAGITTARIUS 

XII.-IX.  (Square) 
This  is  an  excitable  and  irritable  combination,  belonging  to  the 
common  signs.  It  gives  over-activity  to  the  personality,  but  reduces 
the  impulsiveness  of  Sagittarius,  although  it  gives  very  talkative  pro- 
pensities. There  is  much  sympathy  in  the  nature,  strong  feelings 
of  charity  and  religious  sentiment. 

THE    SUN    IN    PISCES    AND    MOON    IN    CAPRICORN 

XII.-X.     (Sextile) 

The  personality  is  apt  to  lead  the  individuaUty  captive  to  the 
materialistic  desires  of  the  Capricorn  nature,  which  is  ever  seeking  to 
be  practical  more  than  dreamy.  An  active  life  is  best  for  those 
under  this  combination,  and  they  should  be  placed  in  positions  of  re- 
sponsibility where  they  can  take  the  lead. 

THE    SUN    IN    PISCES   AND    MOON    IN    AQUARIUS 

XII.-XI.     (Semi-sextile) 

This  gives  intuition,  ability  for  business,  and  pursuits  on  a 
large  scale  where  intuition  may  be  used.  It  gives  a  quiet,  retiring,  and 
harmless  disposition  ;  in  many  respects  it  is  a  good  combination. 

THE    SUN    IN    PISCES   AND    MOON    IN    PISCES 

XII.-XII.     (Conjunction) 

This  combination  gives  a  hospitable  nature,  but  there  is  an  in- 
clination to  be  over-anxious  and  somewhat  too  restless.  It  gives 
much  responsibility,  and  an  inclination  towards  spiritualistic  pheno- 
mena. The  imagination  is  very  keen,  and  there  is  a  tendency  to  give 
way  to  melancholia. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


102  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

The  Lunar  Positions  from  1850  to  1900 

With  this  chapter  we  shall  conclude  the  first  part  of  "  Astro- 
logy for  All/*  and  in  the  second  part  we  shall  take  up  the  more  com- 
plicated details  with  regard  to  the  planets,  casting  the  horoscope,  etc. 
To  those  who  are  not  sure  of  the  hour  of  their  birth,  reference  to  the 
following  tables  will  enable  them  to  gain  some  general  and  fairly 
accurate  idea  as  to  their  character,  etc.,  and  further  study  yfxil  assist 
them  in  obtaining  more  knowledge  of  themselves,  as  indicated  by 
the  solar  and  lunar  positions.  We  may  now  illustrate  the  method  of 
obtaining  knowledge  of  the  character. 

Example :  We  will  suppose  A.  B.  to  have  been  born  January  ist, 
1850.  Reference  to  Chapter  XIII.,  p.  35,  will  show  us  the  individual 
character  of  persons  born  between  December  21st  and  January  20th 
of  any  year,  described  by  the  Sun  in  the  sign  Capricorn.  After 
noting  all  these  characteristics  we  turn  to  the  table  giving  the  place 
of  the  Moon  for  1850,  and  we  find  the  Moon  is  in  the  sign  Si  (Leo), 
and  in  Chapter  VIII.,  p.  22,  we  have  an  outline  of  the  personal 
characteristics  in  general ;  a  more  detailed  description  showing  the 
tendency  of  the  life  will  be  found  on  p.  56  under  the  heading  of 
*'  The  Moon  in  Leo"  ;  then,  if  we  would  blend  these  two  influences, 
we  may  refer  to  the  solar  lunar  combinations  on  p.  95,  under  the 
heading  of  **  The  Sun  in  Capricorn  and  Moon  in  Leo.** 

In  the  tables  **  The  Place  of  the  Moon  **  the  degrees  of  the 
Moon*s  place  are  given  for  noon  of  each  day.  There  are  30°  in  each 
sign ;  by  simple  addition  or  subtraction  the  Moon*s  place  may  be 
found  for  any  hour  in  the  day,  e,g,,  on  the  i6th  of  January,  1850,  the 
Moon  is  in  the  29°  of  cs^  (Aquarius)  at  noon  ;  therefore  at  2  p.m.  the 
Moon  has  changed  her  sign  into  K  (Pisces).  Roughly,  the  ])  (Moon) 
moves  1°  in  two  hours. 

It  should  always  be  remembered  that  the  rising  sign  at  birth  and 
the  planetary  positions  will  often  greatly  mitigate  or  alter  the  influence 
of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  and  although  the  luminaries  symbolise  the 
consciousness  and  its  expression,  fate  and  the  environment  will  form 
a  prominent  feature  in  many  lives,  but  the  main  feature  of  each  life 
will  be  the  individual,  permanent  mood  or  character,  as  represented 
by  the  Sun,  which  **  rules  by  day,*'  and  the  per*^onal,  changeable  and 
sensitive  mood  or  disposition  by  the  Moon,  which  *'  rules  by  night.'* 


Digitized  by 


Google 


ASTROLOGY   FOR   ALL  I03 

To  make  our  meaniog  clear,  we  will  look  up  the  individual  and  per- 
sonal character  and  its  combination  of  the  Duke  of  York,  who  was 
born  June  3rd,  1865.  Reference  to  the  table  of  the  place  of  the  Moon, 
1865,  shows  that  on  June  3rd,  1865,  the  Moon  was  in  s&  (Libra). 
The  following  is  an  extract  from  Chapter  VI.,  representing: 

THE    INDIVIDUAL    AND    PERSONAL   CHARACTER  OF  THE  SIGN    GEMINI 

n     May  2otk  to  June  20tk     u 

This  is  the  first  sign  of  the  airy  triplicity,  also  the  first  of  the 
mutable  signs.  The  airy  triplicity  governs  the  mental  conditions  of 
humanity,  hence  we  find  those  born  in  this  sign  living  more  in  the 
mind,  but,  owing  to  the  sign  belonging  to  the  mutable  group,  they 
are  dualistic — this  being  the  main  feature  of  the  mutable  signs,  and 
from  this  comes  the  tendency  to  express  two  conditions  and  an  incli- 
nation at  times  to  be  rather  easily  influenced  on  one  side  or  the  other. 
Gemini  governs  the  lungs,  also  the  hands  and  arms,  hence  it  may  be 
seen  that  one  hand  may  act  differently  to  the  other.  These  persons 
are  rarely  content  with  a  single  occupation  or  pursuit,  and  seem  to 
delight  in  having  two  things  in  hand  at  the  same  time.  They  can 
very  quickly  adapt  themselves  to  surroundings  or  environment  and 
they  are  remarkable  for  their  versatility,  but  they  are  very  sensitive 
and  have  the  ability  to]  reason  upon  and  analyse  their  sensa- 
tions. They  love  change  and  diversity,  and  they  are  always  the 
best  persons  to  rely  upon  in  an  emergency,  as  they  can  instantly  re- 
spond to  the  requirements  of  the  moment.  They  love  variety  of 
thought  and  all  mental  pursuits,  and  these  they  sometimes  carry  into 
extremes  ;  they  seem  to  take  an  especial  delight  in  leaving  their  work 
unfinished.  They  will  take  up  one  thing,  partly  finish  it,  and  then  go 
on  to  another,  which  they  also  feel  inclined  to  leave  unfinished ;  there- 
fore their  best  work  is  done  when  co-operating  with  others,  and  when 
working  in  unity  with  those  who  understand  their  peculiarities  they 
are  capable  of  great  attainments  in  life,  but  the  spirit  of  diversity 
often  makes  them  experience  two  extremes  during  their  life. 

They  can  be  generous  and  also  somewhat  careful  and  near.  They 
can  present  a  bold  front  and  assertive  attitude,  and  yet  be  timid  and 
highly  nervous.  They  are  conservative  and  progressive,  and  alto- 
gether quite  dualistic  subjects,  which  makes  them  diflficult  for  others 
to  understand,  etc.,  etc.,  etc. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


104  ASTROLOGY   FOR  ALL 

We  may  then  read  what  has  been  said  about  the  Moon  in  the 
Zodiac,  Chapter  XVII.,  and  refer  to  page  57  and  the  paragraph 
describing  the  personal  characteristics  as  follows: 

THE    MOON    IN    LIBRA 

This  position  favours  general  popularity.  It  gives  fondness  for 
music,  poetry,  and  the  fine  arts  generally,  and  much  ability  in  this 
direction.  The  native  is  affectionate,  good-natured,  kind  in  manner 
and  easily  gains  friends.  The  native  is  fond  of  company,  society  and 
friends.  Much  of  his  fate  and  many  events  of  his  life  will  come  about 
through  his  association  with  other  people ;  he  will  be  greatly  swayed 
and  influenced  by  other  people  ;  generally  by  some  one  person.  It 
tends  strongly  to  partnership,  not  merely  in  business,  but  in  almost 
all  affairs  of  life.  He  works  with  another  person  in  nearly  all  under- 
takings; and,  without  necessarily  being  irresolute,  depends  largely 
upon  someone  else,  and  can  get  along  best  in  almost  all  things  when 
associated  with  someone.  The  same  may  be  said  of  the  occupation 
and  position  in  life.  By  combining  these  two  influences  we  obtain 
the  polarity  as  described  by 

THE   SUN    IN    GEMINI    AND    MOON    IN   LIBRA 

This  is  a  very  good  combination,  built  up  on  the  airy  triplicity. 
It  gives  much  refinement  and  a  sympathetic  nature  ;  it  also  increases 
the  intuitions,  gives  a  great  amount  of  foresight,  sharpness  to  the 
perceptive  faculties,  inclines  to  study,  gives  ability  for  public  writing 
and  a  great  amount  of  imitativeness.  It  is  necessary  for  those  born 
under  this  combination  to  live  purely.  The  faculty  of  comparison  is 
well  developed  and  there  is  some  probability  of  his  becoming  popular. 
It  gives  success  in  artistic  pursuits. 

It  is  now  necessary  to  know  the  environment  into  which  the 
subject  was  born  to  judge  as  to  the  future.  Much  information  may 
be  gathered  from  a  study  of  Chapter  XVI.,  which  describes  **  The 
nature  of  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac."  Reference  to  this  chapter 
and  page  45,  shows  us  that  the  Duke  of  York  was  born  in  the  positive 
group  of  the  Airy  triplicity,  in  cardinal  and  mutable  signs.  The  last 
paragraph  describes  the  Airy  signs,  etc.,  etc.  A  careful  study  of  this 
chapter  will  reveal  a  great  deal  of  the  character  without  knowing  the 
actual  birthtime,  and  without  any  elaborate  system  of  mathematics  ; 
in  fact,  without  any  figures  whatever.  If  we  would  know  more  we 
must  study  Part  II.,  which  explains  the  rising  sign,  planets,  etc. 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON   FOR  THE  YEARS   1850-1851 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb.' 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      t 

0      t 

0      / 

0      / 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0      1 

0      1 

0      1 

0      1 

0      1 

I 

21A45 

11^58 

19^49 

6/26 

8V340 

22x17 

24x52 

I2«I5 

3023 

iiSl  9 

5^  7 

I2nii5 

2 

619  8 

25    II 

3»»l  8 

18    44 

20    32 

4><I3 

7T16 

25    45 

17     49 

26    39 

19      9 

25    27 

3 

20      2 

7^59 

16      3 

OV347 

2S2I 

16     21 

20      I 

9041 

2A31 

111514 

3m  0 

8/26 

4 

.3^30 

20    27 

28    36 

12     40 

14      II 

28     46 

3«ii 

24      2 

17     24 

25     48 

16    37 

21     10 

5 

16    33 

2/39 

10/52 

24     30 

26       8 

IIT33 

16    48 

8045 

2IIB22 

10=2=15 

29    56 

3V338 

6 

29     15 

14    38 

22    53 

6x20 

8X17 

24     46 

on54 

23    45 

17      16 

24     29 

12/55 

15     53 

7 

1 1 11140 

26    31 

4V346 

18     16 

20      42 

8«27 

15     25 

8«a54 

1=^^58 

811122 

25    35 

27    55 

8 

23    51 

8V320 

16    34 

0x24 

3T29 

22     35 

OflBI7 

24      3 

16      21 

21     53 

7V355 

9«47 

9 

5/53 

20      8 

28     24 

12     47 

16    40 

7n  6 

15  23 

9W  3 

011120 

5/   0 

20       I 

21     35 

10 

»7    49 

2S?    0 

ios;i9 

25     27 

o«i6 

21     54 

OA34 

23    45 

13      52 

17    43 

i«55 

3K22 

II 

29    40 

13    57 

22     22 

8T28 

14     14 

6flB5i 

15     39 

8=2=  5 

26      58 

OV3   5 

13    44 

15     14 

12 

IIV330 

26      2 

4>C37 

21     48 

28    31 

21     47 

onji30 

21     57 

9/40 

12     12 

25    32 

27     16 

13 

23     20 

8K16 

17      3 

5W27 

i3n  I 

6^36 

15       I 

5^125 

22         I 

24      6 

7x25 

9T33 

14 

5»ii 

20    41 

29    49 

19     20 

27     37 

21     10 

29     10 

18     26 

4V3   7 

5«55 

19    28 

22     10 

15 

17       7 

3T17 

12T48 

3023 

12011 

5nR27 

12-53 

1/    5 

16       I 

17    43 

1T47 

5b  II 

16 

29      8 

16      7 

26       I 

17    33 

26      39 

19     24 

26     14 

13     26 

27     50 

29    36 

14    25 

18    37 

17 

11^17 

29     12 

9  b  27 

1045 

10  A  57 

3-=   I 

911I13 

25    33 

9x37 

11x38 

27    24 

2n29 

18 

23    38 

I2«32 

23      5 

15    57 

25      2 

16     21 

21     53 

7V329 

21     28 

23     53 

iob44 

16   43 

19 

6T13 

26      10 

6n53 

osi  5 

8nB55 

29     25 

4/18 

19    20 

3x25 

6T22 

24    24 

I3SI4 

20 

19      7 

ion  5 

20    51 

14     10 

22     35 

1211113 

16    31 

IX  8 

15     31 

19      9 

8n2i 

15  56 

21 

2«23 

24    17 

4056 

28      9 

6^  4 

24     49 

28     34 

12    56 

27     48 

2«I3 

22    30 

OA42 

22 

16         3 

8045 

19      8 

I2tl|l    3 

19     21 

7/14 

10V329 

24    47 

10T18 

15     31 

6046 

15  24 

23 

on  8 

^    24 

3<a24 

25      51 

2'?n,26 

19     28 

22     20 

6x44 

23       0 

29      2 

21       4 

29  58 

24 

14    38 

8,aio 

17     43 

9=0=29 

15    19 

IV333 

4X  8 

18    48 

5«55 

i2n44 

5A20 

I415I8 

25 

29    28 

22    56 

2nR    I 

22     57 

28     I 

13     30 

15    56 

IT    I 

19      2 

26     34 

19    32 

28      22 

26 

14032 

7nR35 

16     14 

6111  12 

10/30 

25     21 

27    46 

13     25 

2n23 

IOflS29 

319138 

12:2:11 

27 

29    42 

22       0 

0!iii9 

19      12 

22   47 

7«  9 

9K41 

26       3 

15    55 

24  29 

17    38 

25     44 

28 

14  A  48 

6:^    6 

14     10 

1/57 

4V353 

18    57 

21     43 

8«54 

29    40 

8^33 

isJ^30 

9m  I 

29 

29    41 

27     44 

14      25 

16    49 

0x47 

3T56 

22      3 

i3flB38 

22     40 

15     14 

22         4 

30 

l4nBi2 

loiii  58 

26      38 

28     40 

12    44 

16    23 

5n3o 

27    48 

61550 

28    50 

4/54 

31 

28     19 

23    52 

10x27 

29      9 

19    17 

20    59 

17      30 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

J^ov.  ' 

Dec. 

0      1 

0      t  . 

0      / 

0       / 

0      t 

0      t 

0      f 

0      f 

0      f 

0      / 

0      t 

0      1 

I 

29/55 

14x47 

23«34 

8t  7 

ii«58 

IflB    8 

8^59 

2=0=41 

24^59 

0V336 

16x13 

i8x   3 

2 

I2V3  9 

26    35 

5x22 

20    23 

24     54 

15      3 

23    32 

17      9 

8/25 

13    16 

28      9 

29    54 

3 

24     13 

8x23 

17     13 

2«49 

8n   4 

29      5 

811B  2 

iniiS 

21     27 

25    37 

10  X  0 

11T49 

4 

6»  9 

20     13 

29     10 

15     27 

21     24 

13A13 

22     27 

15      6 

4V3   8 

7«43 

21      50 

23    51 

5 

17     59 

2T  8 

11T14 

28     16 

4«B55 

27    23 

6=2'=  42 

28    33 

16     32 

19    39 

3T43 

6b    5 

6 

29     46 

14     II 

23     26 

iini6 

18    36 

iinS35 

20     45 

11/40 

28     42 

1x30 

15     43 

18     31 

7 

IIK33 

26     26 

5«49 

24    30 

2A26 

25    45 

4^36 

24    30 

10x44 

13     20 

27     50 

in  12 

8 

23    25 

8«55 

18     23 

7058 

16    25 

9^52 

18     12 

7KJ  4 

22     39 

25     II 

10  b    7 

14      7 

9 

5T25 

21     44 

in  13 

21    42 

onji33 

23     55 

1/34 

19    26 

4><3i 

7T  6 

22     34 

27    17 

10 

17     39 

4055 

14    20 

5<Jl42 

14     50 

7^50 

14     14 

1x38 

16    22 

19       6 

5ni2 

100940 

II 

ou  12 

18    32 

27    47 

20      0 

29     12 

21     35 

27     35 

13    42 

28     13 

lb  12 

18      0 

24    15 

12 

13       7 

2035 

11037 

4^832 

13=^36 

5/   8 

IOV3I5 

25    40 

loT  7 

13     25 

0flB59 

8a  0 

13 

26     27 

^7      5 

25     50 

19     16 

27    57 

18    25 

22    42 

7><33 

22       4 

25     46 

14     10 

21     53 

14 

ioni6 

1A56 

10A25 

4:^  6 

i2.ni  9 

1V325 

4«57 

19    24 

4«    8 

8ni7 

27    32 

5"B54 

15 

24    31 

17      5 

25     18 

18     52 

26      7 

14      8 

17       3 

1T14 

16     19 

21       0 

iiA  9 

20      0 

16 

9flB    9 

21521 

1011524 

3^128 

9/47 

26    35 

29      0 

13      7 

28    41 

3®57 

25       0 

4=2rII 

17 

24       6 

17    34 

25     33 

17    46 

23      5 

8x48 

10x52 

25       6 

iini8 

17     II 

915  6 

18         25 

18 

9«ai2 

2=^34 

10=45=36 

1/39 

6V3    I 

20    50 

22     43 

7«i4 

24      12 

OA44 

23     26 

211138 

19 

24    18 

17     14 

25     22 

15       6 

18     36 

2X44 

4T35 

19    35 

70028 

14     39 

7-56 

16        47 

20 

9nBi7 

1 11128 

9"U5 

28       7 

0x52 

14     34 

16    33 

2ni3 

21         9 

28    57 

22    37 

0/49 

21 

23     59 

15     13 

23    40 

IOV343 

12     56 

26     27 

28    42 

15     13 

5A17 

131536 

711116 

14     39 

22 

8=£i:2I 

28     30 

7/   5 

23       0 

24     49 

8T25 

lib    5 

28    37 

19     50 

28    32 

21     47 

28     16 

23 

22     19 

11/22 

20      2 

5«   I 

6x40 

20     35 

23    48 

I23B27 

41546 

13^36 

6/   5 

18KJ35 

24 

5^54 

23     52 

2W35 

16    53 

18     31 

3«   0 

6n53 

26    45 

19     58 

28    39 

20      3 

24     36 

25 

19       6 

6V3   6 

14    49 

28    41 

or  29 

15     44 

20     22 

11A28 

5=5=16 

I3»n3i 

3V338 

7x18 

26 

1/58 

18       7 

26    48 

10x30 

12     37 

28     49 

4017 

26    29 

20     28 

28      4 

16    48 

19    44 

27 

14     32 

29     59 

8«39 

22     25 

25       0 

i2ni6 

18    35 

11^842 

511124 

12/11 

29    35 

IH55 

28 

26    53 

ii«47 

20     25 

4T29 

7«39 

26     4 

3.ai3 

26    55 

19     56 

25     49 

I2X     I 

13    56 

29 

9V3  2 

2X12 

16    45 

20     37 

lOflBlO 

18      4 

11-59 

3/59 

8V358 

24       II 

25     50 

30 

21       3 

14      3 

29     14 

3n32 

24      30 

3n»  I 

26    44 

17     31 

21     42 

6X10 

7T42 

31 

2*57 

26      0 

17    23 

17    56 

11*^  5 

4«  5 

19    37 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1852-1853 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

C            1 

0      / 

0      f 

3            1 

0      t 

0      1 

0       f 

0      / 

0      f 

0      f 

0      f 

0      f 

I 

i«39 

i6n52 

7flB56 

28,a  9 

6-43 

0/36 

7V352 

26a  5 

11T25 

I3«44 

28026 

2A48 

2 

13    53 

07B    2 

21     27 

I2IV57 

21     51 

15     10 

21     31 

8  k  40  1  23     21 

25     34 

10  an  39 

15    41 

3 

26    22 

13    37 

5^27 

28      6 

7m  2 

29    26 

4«5i 

21       I 

5«i3 

7n26 

23      7 

28     51 

4 

9nio 

27    37 

19    56 

13=0:26 

22     7 

13V320 

17    53 

3TIO 

17      3 

19     25 

5^53 

I2ll|t22 

5 

22    18 

i2,a  I 

411549 

28    47 

6/56 

26    50 

0H35 

15      9 

28    56 

iflB36 

'9      I 

26       14 

6 

5^46 

26    42 

19    58 

I3m55 

21 .  21 

9«55 

13      0 

27      3 

10056 

14       3 

215138 

IO£r27 

7 

19    33 

ii«R33 

5^13 

28    43 

5V318 

22     39 

25     II 

8«55 

23       9 

26    52 

16    41 

25      0 

8 

3A36 

26    26 

20    24 

13/4 

18   48 

5H   3 

7TI2 

20    51 

5040 

io,a  7 

i^ii 

9m48 

9 

17    50 

11=^=13 

5m  20 

26    54 

i«5o 

17     13 

19      7 

2054 

18     34 

23   51 

16      5 

24     45 

10 

211B12 

25     48 

19   54 

10V317 

14    30 

29     13 

lb   0 

15       9 

1A54 

8nR  6 

imi5 

9/42 

II 

16    36 

lom  5 

4/  2 

23     13 

26    51 

iiT  6 

12    56 

27    43 

15     42 

22     48 

16   31 

24     32 

12 

0^58 

24     2 

17   43 

5«48 

8k57 

22     59 

25      0 

iOflB37 

29    59 

7-52 

1/43 

9V5    7 

13 

15     14 

7/39 

OV359 

18       6 

20    55 

4  b  54 

7015 

23     54 

1411R38 

23       9 

16   41 

23     20 

14 

29    22 

20   58 

13     53 

0M13 

2T47 

16    55 

19    45 

7.5135 

29    35 

811126 

1V316 

7«   8 

15 

i3m2o 

3V339 

26    29 

12     10 

14     38 

29      6 

2flB32 

21     39 

14^39 

23     33 

15    25 

20     31 

16 

27     7 

16    47 

8W51 

24       4 

26    31 

111127 

15     37 

611R   I 

29    40 

8/21 

29       6 

3K28 

17 

10/41 

29     22 

21       3 

5T55 

8  b  28 

24       I 

29       I 

20    35 

I4m29 

22    45 

I2aS20 

16       4 

18 

24     3 

11*47 

3H   7 

17    47 

20    31 

6flB49 

12^42 

5^15 

29       I 

6V342 

25     10 

28     22 

19 

7WI3 

24      3 

15      5 

29    40 

2n42 

19     50 

26    37 

19    52 

13/ I  r* 

20     12 

7K41 

10T26 

20 

20      9 

6x11 

27      0 

lib  37 

15     2 

3A  6 

ionR43 

411122 

26    58 

3«i9 

19    55 

22     21 

21 

2«53 

18     13 

8T53 

23    38 

27    31 

16     34 

24    57 

18    40  t  10V325 

16      6 

1T59 

4  b  12 

22 

15     24 

or  9 

20    45 

5045 

100912 

onRi6 

9=^13 

2/43 

23     33 

28     36 

13    55 

16       2 

23 

27    42 

12     2 

2  b  38 

18       I 

23       6 

14       9 

23     30 

16    31 

6ssr24 

IOK53 

25    47 

27     55 

24 

9K50 

23    53 

14     33 

OflB27 

6^14 

28     12 

7m43 

oV3*5 

19       3 

23       I 

7«37 

9n55 

25 

21      50 

5«45 

26    32 

13      7 

19     39 

I2=-=25 

21     50 

13     25 

IK31 

5T   2 

19     29 

22       4 

26 

3T44 

17    43 

8040 

26      5 

3IIR22 

26     44 

5/51 

26     32 

13     49 

16    59 

1024 

4«B24 

27 

15     35 

29    50 

21       0 

9.a24 

17  23 

1111117 

19    43 

93527 

26      0 

28     52 

13    24 

16     56 

28 

27    28 

I2ni2 

3flB37 

23      8 

I  =-=43 

25     30 

3W24 

22     12 

8t  4 

iob43 

25     30 

29     41 

29 

9«28 

24    52 

16    34 

7njii6 

16     17 

9/47 

16    55 

4><45 

20       I 

22    34 

7045 

I2A39 

30 

21     39 

29    57 

21     50 

im  2 

23     56 

os:i2 

17       8 

i«54 

4026 

20     10 

25     50 

31 

4n  5 

13^49 

15   51 

13     16 

29     21 

16    23 

911RI5 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec] 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0      f 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0      f 

0      t 

0       » 

0      $ 

0      t 

I 

22nji53 

15^53 

2611151 

I9V3I3 

25  as  46 

12T38 

15  b  14 

290   4 

i4.n.29 

1911U28 

1011157 

19/12 

2 

6^44 

0/    I 

10/58 

2*38 

8K33 

24    40 

27      2 

II95    9 

27    35 

3=^=30 

25    55 

4V322 

3 

20    47 

14      6 

24     54 

15     48 

21       6 

6  b  34 

8050 

23       27 

iiiTji  0 

17     49 

10/52 

19      19 

4 

5m  2 

28      8 

8V339 

28     44 

3T25 

18    23 

20    21 

6,a  0 

24    43 

211120 

25    42 

386:56 

5 

19     24 

I2KJ  6 

22     14 

iiHiy 

15     34 

onio 

2flB39 

18     49 

8-38 

16     54 

10V318 

18        9 

6 

3/53 

25     55 

5«38 

24      0 

27    35 

II    59 

14  46 

I1tR52 

22    42 

I  /27 

!    24       36 

IK55 

7 

18     23 

9«35 

18    53 

6T22 

9  b  30 

23    50 

27       3 

15       9 

6m5i 

15     54 

8«34 

15     17 

8 

2V349 

23       I 

IK57 

18    35 

21     20 

5flB46 

9^32 

28     39 

21         2 

0V310 

22     12 

28     14 

9 

17       6 

6K13 

14    48 

Ob  39 

3n  8 

17     50 

22     I4 

I2:ii:20 

5/" 

14     15 

5x31 

10T52 

10 

i«  9 

19      7 

27     28 

12     35 

14    55 

oA  4 

5n»io 

26       9 

19   19 

28       7 

18     32 

23     12 

II 

14     53 

IT44 

9T54 

24    25 

26    45 

12    30 

18     20 

lom  7 

3V322 

iia48 

1T17 

5«20 

12 

28     15 

14      4 

22       8 

6ni2 

8as40 

25     II 

1=^44 

24    II 

17      22 

25     15 

13     49 

17    19 

13 

11K16 

26     10 

4«io 

18      0 

20    45 

8tir  9 

15     25 

8/22 

iai7 

8K31 

26      9 

29    II 

14 

23     56 

8b    7 

16      4 

29    51 

3Sl   2 

21     28 

29     20 

22     37 

15      4 

21     34 

8  b  19 

iin  0 

15 

6T17 

19    57 

27    53 

113352 

15     36 

5^  8 

1311131 

6V355 

28    43 

4T25 

20     21 

22    48 

16 

18     24 

in46 

9041 

24      8 

28     32 

19     12 

27     56 

21     13 

I2KIO 

17      3 

2ni5 

49B37 

17 

Ob  20 

13    40 

21     33 

6A43 

iinj{53 

3m37 

12/31 

5«26 

25      23 

29    28 

14      5 

16     29 

18 

12     10 

25    44 

3flB35 

19    41 

25     41 

18     20 

27     13 

19     30 

8T20 

iib4i 

25  52 

28     26 

19 

24      0 

8flB  3 

15     52 

3ns  8 

9=2=56 

3/17 

"V355 

3x20 

21       0 

23     43 

7®39 

10  A  30 

20 

5055 

20    41 

28     30 

17       4 

24     36 

18     20 

26     32 

16     52 

3«24 

5n37 

19    30 

22     44 

21 

17    59 

3.a4i 

iiia32 

1=^28 

9m36 

3V321 

ioa55 

or  3 

15     33 

17     25 

i<a28 

51511 

22 

OflBiS 

17       4 

25       2 

16     16 

24     47 

18     II 

25       0 

12     54 

27     30 

29     12 

13   37 

17     55 

*3 

12    47 

Onji50 

8njJ59 

ini20 

10/    0 

2«43 

8K43 

25     24 

9020 

IlflB     I 

26     2 

o-=57 

24 

25    36 

14     56 

23     21 

16    31 

25       6 

16    51 

22       I 

7W37 

21       8 

22      58 

8nR47 

14     21 

25 

8A43 

2©     15 

8-   I 

1/38 

9W55 

OM34 

4T54 

19    36 

2as58 

5SI  8 

21     55 

28       9 

26 

22      7 

13-42 

22     54 

16    33 

24     22 

13     50 

17     26 

in  28 

14     56 

17      36 

5^30 

12  11122 

27 

5nB45 

28     10 

7m48 

iVJio 

8«24 

26     42 

29     40 

13    16 

27       8 

on»26 

19     33 

26       59 

28 

19     35 

12 11135 

22     36 

15     24 

21     59 

9TII 

lib  39 

25      7 

9.JI39 

13     42 

4m  2 

"/55 

29 

3=^34 

7/12 

29     13 

5>^   9 

21     24 

23     31 

700  5  1  22    31 

27     25 

18    53 

27          4 

30 

17     38 

21     31 

I2tS40 

17    56 

3«23 

5019 

19     16  1     5nP47 

"===35 

3/59 

I2V316 

31 

I  "145 

5VJ31 

0T25 

17       8 

1^43 

26       8 

27       22 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1854-1855 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

I 

0      t 
12W13 

0      » 
2T15 

0      t 
lOT  5 

0      » 
26 «   9 

0      f 
28nii 

0      1 

i2,a  9 

0            t 

T5nR24 

0      / 
3m  6 

0      t 
24/56 

0      t 
4«  9 

0      1 
26x58 

0      » 
3«3i 

2 

26    40 

15     25 

23     13 

8ni6 

lOOB     I 

24    12 

27     55 

6     54 

9V317 

18     32 

IOT37 

16     16 

3 

10x39 

28       8 

5«58 

20       12 

21      51 

6njl27 

10-44 

0/45 

23     53 

2K55 

24      4 

28    55 

4 

24    10 

iob30 

18    21 

2<a  2 

3<a45 

.18     59 

23     54 

14     59 

8«39 

17     13 

7«i5 

II  020 

5 

7T13 

22     34 

01128 

13     51 

15    48 

1^52 

711128 

29    36 

23     29 

IT22 

20     12 

23    35 

6 

19    51 

4028 

12     24 

25     45 

28      5 

15      8 

21     29 

14V33I 

8K14 

15      14 

2052 

5041 

7 

2  b  10 

16     15 

24     13 

7<a49 

1011540 

28    51 

5^5^ 

29     38 

22     46 

28      48 

15     18 

17    40 

8 

14       13 

28      2 

67s  I 

20       7 

23     37 

1311I  0 

20    46 

14x48 

6T58 

12  b     I 

27    30 

29    33 

9 

26         7 

90053 

17     54 

2np43 

6.0=58 

27     34 

5V354 

29     49 

20     46 

24      52 

9flB32 

11A24 

10 

7054 

21     51 

29     57 

15     39 

20    43 

12/27 

21     10 

14K32 

4«    6 

7024 

21      27 

23     16 

II 

19      41 

4^  0 

12^12 

28     57 

4"152 

27    33 

6«25 

28     51 

17       2 

19      40 

3^19 

5nRi3 

12 

IflS29 

16    20 

24     43 

12^35 

19    22 

I2V343 

21     27 

12T41 

29     34 

10942 

15     II 

17     19 

13 

13      22 

28    54 

7n»3i 

26     31 

4/   3 

27     4^ 

6K    7 

26       I 

11049 

13    37 

27     10 

29     38 

14 

25      22 

iinR4i 

20     36 

10 11142 

18    52 

I2»35 

20      21 

8b54 

23     50 

25    28 

9njj2o 

12^16 

If 

7A3O 

24     39 

3^57 

25       I 

3V342 

27       3 

4T  5 

21     25 

5^43 

7«a22 

21      44 

25     17 

16 

19     47 

7-49 

17    32 

9/25 

18     24 

iiK   7 

17     21 

3037 

17    33 

19      21 

4-27 

811143 

17 

2111115 

21     10 

inii7 

23     49 

2«54 

24     45 

Ob  12 

15     36 

29    25 

injJ32 

17      31 

22     36 

18 

14     54 

4^141 

15      9 

SV5  9 

17       8 

7T58 

12    41 

27     27 

1 1  ,$123 

13    57 

011159 

6/57 

19 

27     45 

18     23 

29      8 

22     23 

IH   3 

20    50 

24    53 

90016 

23    30 

26    38 

14     49 

21     40 

20 

10.^51 

2/16 

13/ II 

6«28 

14     40 

3«23 

6054 

21       6 

5nR49 

9^37 

28     59 

6V339 

21 

24     12 

16     20 

27     i5 

20     24 

27     58 

15     42 

18    46 

3^  0 

18     20 

22    52 

13/24 

21     45 

22 

7^150 

OV3  35 

11V324 

4K    9 

10T59 

27     49 

OflB35 

15      0 

i^  5 

611126 

28       0 

6x48 

23 

21     48 

14     59 

25     32 

17     42 

23     45 

9048 

12    24 

27      9 

14       3 

20     13 

I2V339 

21     40 

24 

6/    5 

29     29 

92540 

IT   2 

6«i7 

21     41 

24     14 

9njj28 

27     12 

4/11 

27     15 

6K12 

^1 

20     39 

14SSS  0 

23     44 

14       8 

18     37 

3flB3i 

6^  9 

21      56 

10 11133 

18     16 

11x43 

20     22 

26 

5V327 

28     25 

7K4I 

27       I 

0047 

15     21 

18      8 

4'^34 

24      4 

2V327 

25     59 

4T  8 

27 

20    23 

12K38 

21     27 

9tf39 

12     49 

27     II 

0TIRI4 

17     23 

7/46 

16    40 

lOK    0 

17     30 

28 

5«i9 

26     33 

4T59 

22        4 

24     44 

9A  4 

12     29 

011124 

21     38 

o«53 

23    45 

Ob  32 

29 

20      5 

18     14 

41116 

6<B35 

21       2 

24    52 

13     38 

5V340 

15      3 

7T15 

13     17 

30 

4>(34 

lb  II 

16     18 

18     24 

31R  8 

7.0.28 

27      7 

19    51 

29      9 

20    39 

25    47 

31 

18     38 

13     49 

0A14 

20     19 

10/53 

13K  8 

8n  5 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      / 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0      f 

0      t 

0       f 

0      1 

0      t 

0      f 

0      / 

0      f 

I 

2oni5 

5Sl   I 

13A47 

28nB33 

211123 

22/    i 

025  22 

24K25 

15W53 

20047 

6A  6 

715148 

2 

2flBI9 

I       54 

25    42 

11^  0 

15     34 

6V323 

15       19 

8T55 

29    13 

3flB26 

18       4 

19    38 

3 

14      18 

28    49 

711B42 

23     38 

39       I 

20     52 

OK  10 

23      0 

121119 

15    47 

29    57 

ita:3i 

4 

26      12 

ionB47 

19     49 

6ni28 

12/42 

5«25 

14      46 

6b39 

24    45 

27    55 

1111B48 

13     33 

5 

8^  5 

22     50 

2^  2 

19    31 

26    35 

19     54 

29      3 

19    53 

7®  4 

9A52 

23    41 

25     47 

6 

19    57 

5^  0 

14     24 

2/46 

IOV337 

4x15 

13T  0 

2n48 

19     12 

21     45 

5=^42 

811117 

7 

inji50 

17     19 

26     56 

16     14 

24     46 

18     25 

26    37 

15     25 

i,aii 

3ns35 

17    52 

21       7 

8 

13     47 

29     51 

9^38 

29    55 

8x59 

2T23 

9«55 

27     49 

13     5 

15     28 

011115 

4/17 

9 

25^52 

1 2111 40 

22     35 

13V350 

23     14 

16       7 

22    56 

lOOS    2 

24    57 

27     24 

12    52 

17     48 

10 

25     50 

5/48 

27     57 

7X26 

29     38 

5n43 

22         7 

6njl48 

9-27 

25     44 

IV337 

II 

20     39 

9/25 

19     19 

I2«l6 

21     35 

i2«56 

18     i8 

4<a  7 

18     40 

21     38 

8/51 

15     39 

12 

3^32 

23     26 

3V3I2 

26     42 

5T38 

26       I 

oflB43 

16         2 

0^36 

3  "159 

22     II 

29     52 

13 

16     49 

7W55 

17     25 

11X13 

19     32 

8055 

12     17 

27     54 

12     36 

16     30 

5V345 

14X  9 

14 

0/34 

22    48 

13558 

25     42 

3«i5 

21     36 

25      8 

9nJJ45 

24     43 

29     14 

19     30 

28     26 

15 

14     49 

7«58 

16    47 

loT  5 

16    45 

4flB    ^ 

7A  9 

21     36 

6  "159 

12/11 

3«25 

I2K39 

16 

29     31 

23     16 

IK44 

24     15 

29     59 

16    25 

19      5 

3-29 

19     26 

25     23 

17     27 

26    47 

17 

14V336 

8K30 

16    41 

8«    8 

12058 

28     34 

onB56 

15     28 

2/    9 

8V351 

1x36 

10T48 

18 

29    55 

23     29 

1T29 

21     41 

25     41 

10^34 

12     47 

27     36 

15     II 

22     36 

15     50 

2A      41 

8  b  26 

19 

I5«i5 

8t  5 

16      0 

4053 

809    9 

22     28 

24     38 

9  "157 

28     34 

6x38 

OT  6 

20 

OK  27 

22     12 

o«    7 

17     43 

20     23 

4njl20 

6^35 

22    36 

I2V322 

20    57 

14     21 

22       2 

21 

15     18 

5«49 

13    48 

0014 

2,J127 

16     13 

18     42 

5/38 

26     35 

5x29 

28     33 

5030 

22 

29    44 

18     57 

27      3 

12     30 

14      23 

28     II 

im  3 

19      5 

ii»ii 

20      9 

I2b37 

18    46 

23 

13T40 

in  41 

9052 

24     33 

26      16 

IOTf>:2I 

13   45 

3V3   2 

26      5 

4T53 

26     31 

13550 

24 

27      7 

M     5 

22     21 

6A29 

8nRio 

22     45 

26   51 

17    28 

IIKII 

19    34 

lonio 

14    40 

25 

10 «   9 

26    13 

4®33 

18     22 

20     II 

511130 

10/25 

2«I9 

26      19 

4«    4 

23    31 

27     16 

26 

22    48 

80512 

16     34 

onRi7 

2^22 

18     39 

24    28 

17     29 

I1T19 

18     18 

6flB34 

9^38 

27 

5nii 

20         4 

28     28 

12     17 

14     48 

2/14 

9W  0 

2K48 

26        2 

2011 

19     18 

21     47 

28 

17    20 

i«Jl55 

10A19 

24     27 

27     33 

16     16 

23     56 

18       5 

IOb23 

15     41 

1^44 

3nB45 

29 

29    21 

22     13 

6^51 

1 011138 

0V342 

9«   7 

3T  9 

24      18 

28    47 

13    55 

15     36 

30 

IIflBl6 

41511 

19     29 

24       6 

15     27 

24     22 

17     51 

7n45 

lIflB3I 

25    55 

27     25 

31 

23      9 

16     17 

7/54 

9H31 

2b    6 

23    56 

9^17 

T 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1856-1857 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March  1    April 

1 

May 

June] 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec 

0      f 

0       t 

0          t              Of 

0      f 

0      t 

0             t 

0      1 

0      / 

0      / 

0        r 

0           r 

I 

21^16 

6/48 

28/25     i9«3i 

28K17 

2I«28 

28n35 

16^31 

1:^29 

3^47 

19/   4  1 

24V516 

2 

31129: 

20       3 

I2W   4        4K14 

13T  4 

5n42 

110559 

28    53 

13         17 

15    38 

IV333  ' 

7x25 

3 

16      0 

3KJ50 

26     13      19     14 

27    53 

19  42 

25       8 

iimj  3 

25         2 

27    35 

14     15  I 

20       47 

4 

28    54 

18       6 

IOSK49          4T22 

I2«38 

33526 

7^59 

23       I 

,  611150 

9/42 

27     13  1 

4K23 

5 

12/13 

2«47 

25    48     19    29 

27     II 

16     49 

20    33 

4-52 

18    43 

22       2 

io»3o  1 

18        13 

6 

25    59 

17     46 

UK   0       4W27 

I  in  26 

29     50 

2nji50 

16    39 

0/47 

4KJ39 

^1      I  1 

2TI7 

7 

IOV3  9 

2K54 

26     16 

19       6 

25     19 

12  A  30 

14     54 

28    27 

13      7 

17    37 

8x  6  1 

16     35 

8 

24     38 

18       0 

11T26 

3n23 

8«B47 

24     52 

26     46 

ioni2i 

25    46 

o«59 

22    27 

lb    6 

9 

9«i9 

2T54 

26     19 

17     13 

21     50 

6nR58 

8^37 

22    26 

8V349 

14    47 

7T  7 
22       2 

15     45 

10 

24       5 

17     30 

iob5i 

02536 

4A30 

18     53 

20     26 

4/47 

22     20 

29      2 

0D27 

n 

8K46 

i«44 

24     56 

13     34 

16    51 

0-43 

211121 

17    29 

6»i8 

13K40 

7«   5 

15       5 

12 

23     17 

15     36 

8035 

26     II 

28    57 

12     32 

14     26 

0V336 

20    43 

28    39 

22      8 

29     31 

13 

7T35 

29       5 

21     50 

SSI29 

101552 

24     26 

26    48 

14    10 

5>C3i 

13T49 

jn  I 

13®  39 

H 

21     36 

i2ni5 

4flB42 

20     34 

22    41 

611130 

9/30 

28     10 

20    34 

29      3 

21    37 

27     23 

15 

5«2I 

25      8 

17    16 

2TIR29 

4^30 

18     48 

22     33 

i2«33 

5T43 

14  bio 

5048 

10A42 

16 

18     51 

73547 

29    35 

14   19 

16     22 

1/22 

6V3  0 

27     14 

20    49 

29      I 

19    32 

23     35 

17 

20   8 

20     14 

11^43 

26       8 

28     21 

14     14 

19     49 

I2K    5 

5«43 

13030 

2,5148 

615   5 

18 

15     12 

2A31 

23    42 

7=^57 

1011131 

27     25 

3«57 

26    57 

20     19 

27    33 

15    37 

18     17 

19 

28       6 

14     39 

5"B35 

19     51 

22     53 

IOV354 

18     17 

11T43 

4n33 

1105    8 

28      4 

0:-=i4 

20 

ioaB49 

26    41 

17    26 

I  "151 

5/29 

24     37 

2K45 

26     17 

18     24 

24     16 

1011513 

12       4 

21 

23     22. 

8ns36 

29     15 

13     59 

18     19 

8«32 

17     13 

iob36 

i^si 

7Sl   I 

22      9 

23     50 

22 

5A44 

20     28 

11^  4 

26     19 

1V324 

22     34 

1T38 

24     38 

14     56 

19    26 

3^58 

511140 

23 

17     56 

2^16 

22      5 

8/49 

14    42 

6H41 

15     55 

8021 

27     42 

inR36 

15     44 

17    37 

24 

29     59 

14       4 

41155     21     33 

28     13 

20     50 

Ob    2 

21     48 

10  A 12 

13     34 

27     31 

29     45 

25 

IITIR54 

25     56 

17      0 

4V331 

"«55 

4T56 

14      0 

42559 

22     28 

25     25 

9^24 

12/7 

26 

23     44 

7  "154 

29     16 

17     46 

^    48 

19       6 

27    47 

17    55 

4nJi34 

7^12 

21     25 

24     44 

27 

5^31 

20       3 

11/46 

i«i7 

9K51 

3«ii 

11024 

OA37 

16     ^2 

18     59 

3/36 

7V338 

28 

17     21 

2/28 

24     33 

15      7 

24      2 

17     12 

24    50 

13      8 

28   24 

011148 

15     59 

20     46 

29 

29     18 

15     14 

7V342 

29     15 

8T20 

in  8 

82s  4 

25     27 

IO:^I2 

12     41 

28     32 

4«   7 

30 

1 1 11127 

21     13 

I3><39 

22     43 

14    57 

21       6 

7nP36 

21     59 

24     40 

11V318 

17     39 

31 

23     55 

535X0 

7«    7 

3<a56 

19    36 

6/47 

IK  19 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      t 

0      » 

0      t 

0      t 

0      $ 

0      f 

C            f 

0         r 

0      t 

0      f 

0      t 

0      t 

I 

^5^  7 

8«   6 

18^46 

100054 

16A51 

2-47 

4^54 

18/50 

4x42 

9x43 

lb  24 

9056 

2 

29      I 

22     10 

2nf8 

24     16 

29    30 

14    41 

16    43 

IV3   0 

18      I 

23    54 

16    36 

25     15 

3 

13T   I 

611  9 

16   55 

7A18 

Ill's  50 

26    30 

28     37 

13      42 

IK39 

8T25 

1052 

IO0S2I 

4 

27      7 

20      I 

OflB38 

20      I 

23    57 

SniiS 

10/38 

26      31 

15     36 

23     12 

17      0 

25       3 

5 

ii«i7 

3®45 

14      5 

2nR30 

5=^54 

20      8 

22    50 

9«37 

29     48 

8b   6 

10552 

9.ai7 

6 

25    31 

17     19 

27     17 

14     45 

17    45 

2/   4 

5W13 

22    58 

14T10 

23      0 

16    19 

23     0 

7 

9046 

0,^41 

10^115 

26    51 

29     34 

H      7 

17     49 

6x33 

28    37 

7046 

0A20 

6nRi3 

8 

23    56 

13     50 

23      0 

8:^=50 

II 11123 

26    18 

o«37 

20     18 

13  «   4 

22     17 

13    54 

19       I 

9 

7®59 

26     43 

5nR33 

20    43 

23     14 

8V338 

13    36 

4T13 

27    28 

60530 

27      2 

1^28 

10 

21     47 

9np20 

17    55 

2ni34 

5/    9 

21      9 

26    48 

18     15 

11044 

20    23 

9nJi49 

13     38 

II 

5.ai9 

21     42 

OrGi     3 

14    23 

17      9 

3«5o 

lOKIO 

2  b  21 

25     51 

3A55 

22     17 

25     38 

12 

18     30 

3^51 

12         4 

26     13 

29     18 

16    43 

23     43 

16      31 

92545 

17      7 

4^32 

7  "131 

13 

in»i9 

15     48 

23        58 

8/    7 

">335 

29    50 

7T28 

0043 

23    28 

oirp  3 

16    37 

19     21 

14 

13     49 

27     39 

5nR48 

20      8 

24       4 

I3><12 

21     24 

14     55 

6<a57 

12     44 

28    36 

i/ii 

15 

26       I 

9"127 

17    37 

2V318 

6^48 

26    50 

5»32 

29      3 

20     12 

25     12 

1011130 

13       4 

16 

8^  0 

21     18 

29     28 

14     43 

19     48 

10T48 

19     50 

1325  6 

3nJii3 

7^29 

22     22 

25       0 

17 

19     51 

3/16 

11/26 

27     24 

3K   8 

25      4 

4017 

27       0 

16       I 

X9     38 

4/13 

7V3   I 

18 

ini38 

15     27 

23     35 

I02S27 

16    51 

9«37 

18     48 

io<a4i 

28    35 

111140 

16       5 

19      8 

19 

13     29 

27    55 

6V3   0 

23     54 

0T58 

24     24 

32617 

24      7 

10-57 

13     35 

27    59 

I»22 

20 

25     27 

IOV344 

18     46 

7^47 

15     28 

9ni8 

17     38 

711s  16 

23      7 

25     28 

9V357 

13     44 

21 

7^39 

23     57 

i«55 

22       6 

Ob  19 

24     11 

i«Jl45 

20      7 

5111  8 

7/18 

22      2 

26     18 

22 

20       7 

7«35 

15     30 

6T49 

15     24 

82554 

15     33 

2^40 

17       2 

19      9 

4»i6 

9X  4 

23 

2V355 

21     35 

29     31 

21     51 

on35 

23     19 

28     58 

14    58 

28    53 

iV3   4 

16    43 

22      8 

24 

18       3 

5^54 

i3>(57 

7»    4 

15  42 

7A20 

I2np    I 

27       3 

10/44 

13       6 

29     27 

5T31 

25 

29     31 

20     27 

28    43 

22     17 

02B34 

20    54 

24     41 

8ni59 

22     40 

25     20 

12X33 

19     i8 

26 

i3S!ri6 

5T   6 

13T42 

711 22 

15       4 

4'»R    I 

7^  3 

20    51 

4V344 

7«50 

26      4 

3«29 

27 

27     14 

19     46 

28    45 

22       8 

29       6 

16     42 

19      9 

2/43 

17      2 

20    40 

loT  3 

18      3 

28 

IIK2I 

4»2I 

13W44 

62230 

I2,fl39 

29       4 

im  5 

14     39 

29    38 

3>^55 

24     30 

2057 

29 

25     33 

28     32 

20     24 

25     44 

11^  9 

12    57 

26    46 

12x35 

17    37 

9»23 

18      4 

30 

9T47 

130    I 

3«JX5o 

8nB23 

23       4 

24     48 

9V3   7 

25     56 

1T48 

24     35 

3®i3 

31 

23     58 

27      9 

! 

20     43 

1 

6/45 

21     44 

16    25 

18     15 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  01^  THE  MOON  EOR  THE  YEARS  1858-1859 


DM 


I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
14 
'5 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

27 
28 

29 
30 
31 


Jan. 


2A59 

17    19 

inp  9 

14  31 
27     26 

9==57 

22  II 

4^11 
16       4 

27  54 
9/45 

21  40 
5V342 

15  52 

28  II 
ios:40 

23  19 
6m   8 

19      9 

2T23 

15     51 

29  36 

13  a  36 
27  53 
12024 

27  4 
11048 
26  28 
10^55 
25  5 
815152 


Feb. 


22nRi5 
5-14 

17     51 
om  9 

t2       14 

.24       9 
6/    I 

^1  54 
29  51 
IIV357 
24  14 
6«45 
19     29 

2K28 

15  41 
29       6 

I2T43 
26  30 
io«36 
24  30 
8n4i 
22     56 

7flBI2 
21       27 

5«J136 
19    35 

3nB22 

16  51 


March 


o^  4 

12  57 
25     33 

7^153 

20  o 

1/58 

13  51 
25    45 

7V343 
19    50 

2SSIO 

14  47 
27  42 
IOM57 

24  32 
8T23 

22     29 
6«44 

21  5 
5026 

ig    44 

3flB57 
18      o 

IA54 

15  37 
29  9 
12ns  28 

25  34 

8=2r27 

21         7 

3  "134 


April 


15^50 

27    55 

9/53 

21  46 

3W39 

15  36 

27  41 
loss  o 

22  37 
5>(35 

18    58 
2T46 

16  57 

I«27 

16  10 
on59 

15     45 
oas2i 

14     43 

28  47 

I2,a33 
26       I 

9nRi2 

22       10 

4^55 

17  28 

29  52 
12111  7 

24     15 
6/15 


May 


18/  10 
OV3  3 
"     55 

23  50 
5«54 

18  10 

OK43 

13  38 
27  o 
10T50 

25  8 
9«5i 

24  52 
ion  2 

25  10 
loac  7 
24    44 

8<a57 

22    46 

6npio 

19  14 
1-59 

14  30 

26  50 
9m  I 

21       5 

3/    4 

14    59 

26  52 
8V344 

20  37 


June 


2«34 

14  38 
26    54 

9M25 

22  16 

5T33 
19     17 

3  a  31 

18     13 

3ni6 

18  33 
3«B5i 

19  I 

3A51 
18     16 

2njH3 

15  42 

28  46 

I  I  .Or  29 

23  54 
6;ni  7 

18  10 
0/    8 

12       2 

23  54 
5V347 

17     41 

29  39 

II«42 

23     52 


July 


6kI2 

18    47 
IT39 

14  53 
28     31 

I2b35 
27  6 
11058 
27       5 

I23Sl8 
27  25 
I2AI8 

26  48 
1015152 
24       28 

7^37 
20     23 

2ni49 

15  I 

27  2 

8/57 

20    49 

2V342 

14  37 
26    36 

835:42 

20    55 

3Ki8 

15  51 

28  37 
IIT39 


August 


24T57 
8«35 

22  32 

6049 
21     24 

6asio 
21       3 

5<a54 

20  35 
4^859 

19       I 

2^38 

15     51 

28  41 
iiniii 

23  24 
5^27 

17    22 

29  14 
IIV3  8 
23       6 

5«i2 
17  28 
29    55 

I2K35 

25     28 

8T34 

21  54 
5»28 

19  14 
2ni3 


Sept. 


I7n23 
10541 

16  6 
0^32 

14  57 
29  14 
1311S19 

27  8 
10^39 
23     49 

611138 
19      9 

1/25 
13  28 
25     23 

7V316 
19     10 

I  a  10 

13  20 

25     44 

8m24 

21     22 

4T37 
18       9 

i«56 

15  54 

on  I 

14  12 

28  24 
12036 


Oct. 

Nov. 

0    ^ 

0  t 

26045 

18  lip  36 

IOA48 

i:A=5i 

24   46 

14  55 

8nR35 

27  48 

22  15 

1011130 

5^42 

23   0 

18  56 

5/19 

I  "155 

17  27 

14  38 

29  26 

27   5 

11W18 

9^19 

23   6 

21  21 

4«56 

3V315 

16  51 

15   6 

28  58 

26  59 

IIK22 

8«57 

24   7 

21   8 

7T18 

3^34 

20   58 

16  21 

5«  6 

29  31 

19  38 

13T  4 

4029 

27   0 

19  30 

lib  14 

4030 

25  42 

19   21 

ion  16 

3A56 

24  50 

18  10 

9017 

2115  4 

23  35 

15  37 

7A40 

28  51 

21  31 

11=^50 

511B10 

Dec.' 


24:0=36 
711V10 

19  34 
1/50 

13    58 

25  58 
7V353 

19    42 

ia30 
13  19 
25     13 

7M16 

19  35 
2T15 

15  20 
28  54 
I2«59 
27  32 
I2n30 

27  43 
13®   I 

28  12 

i3<a  8 
27  40 

nnp47 
25     27 

8:0=43 
21     38 

411116 

16  39 
28     52 


DM 


Jan. 


Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 


I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

27 
28 

29 
30 
31 


10/56 
22     54 

4V347 
16  38 
28  27 
ioa:i7 
22       9 

4K   7 

16  13 
28  33 
iiTio 

24  10 

7«34 
21     27 

5047 

20    33 

5®39 

20  55 
6,aio 

21  16 
61TJ1  2 

20     24 

4=0:18 

17  45 
oin.46 

13     25 

25  47 
7/55 

19    53 

IV545 

13     35 


25W24 

7«i5 

19  10 

IMIO 
13      19 

25  37 
8t  7 

20  52 
3«54 

17  15 
on58 

15  4 
29  29 
14013 
29  9 
I4<a  9 
29       6 

i3"Ji5i 
28  17 
12=0=19 

25  55 
9m  5 

21  51 

4/    7 

16  27 
28  24 
10V515 

22  3 


3«53 

15  47 
27  50 
lOK    2 

22  26 
5T  2 

17  51 
o«54 

14  II 
27  42 
iin26 
25    24 

9®35 

23  56 
8,a26 

22  59 
7nB32 

21     58 

6:0:12 

20         9 

3^144 

16  56 

29  47 
12/  16 

24  29 
6V328 

18  20 
ox  9 

II     59 

23  57 
6>c   6 


18x29 

IT  8 

14       4 

27  17 
io«46 
24     26 

8ni7 

22       16 

6020 

20    27 

4«J136 

18  45 

2»V54 
16     59 

0=0=59 
14     49 

28  27 
iiin.49 
24     54 

7/40 
20       7 

2V320 
14  19 
26      II 

8x  o 

19  52 
1H51 

M       3 

26    33 

9T23 


22T35 

6«  9 
20       2 

4n  9 
18     27 

2048 
17       9 

1^25 

15  35 
29  36 
13^29 

27  14 
10-49 

24     15 
7"l3o 

20  32 
3/20 

15     54 

28  14 
10V321 
22     18 

4«  9 
15     57 

27  48 
9K47 

21  59 
4T31 

17     25 
Ob  45 

14    31 

28  41 


i3nio 

27  51 
12037 
27     21 

IIA55 
26  15 
1011520 
24  10 
7-44 

21  4 
411111 

17  5 
29  47 
12/  17 
24     36 

6V345 

18  45 
0x37 

12     25 

24  13 
6m    3 

18       2 

0TI4 
12     44 

25  37 
8  b  56 

22  44 
6n58 

21     37 
6032 


21036 
6^39 

21  33 
611510 

20  28 
4-23 

17     58 

I  ini2 

14  8 

26  48 
9/15 

21  30 

3V336 

15  35 

27  28 
9«i6 

21  4 
2M52 

14  45 
26     47 

9T  o 
21     30 

4  b  20 
17     35 

in  16 

15  25 
29  58 
14053 

o,a  I 

15    12 

011519 


1511511 
29  43 
13^50 
27  31 
1011148 

23  41 
6/16 

18    34 
0V540 

12  38 

24  29 

6ai8 
18  6 
29  55 
IIK49 

23  49 
5T58 

18     19 
Ob  53 

13  45 
26    57 

ion  30 

24  28 
8048 

23    29 

8,5125 
23     30 

811535 
23     32 

8=0=11 
22     27 


611117 

19  40 

2/37 
15  II 
27     27 

9^3  30 
21     23 

3X11 

14  59 

26  49 

8x44 

20  47 
2T59 

15  22 

27  57 
iob44 
23     46 

7n  2 
20    34 

4022 
18    28 

2^50 
17    26 

211511 
17      o 

1-45 

16  19 

oni35 
14    27 

27    53 


10/53 
23  30 
5V347 
17  50 
29  42 
ii«30 

23  18 
5>€ii 

17  13 
29     27 

1IT54 

24  35 
7«30 

20     38 
3059 

17  30 
1011 

15  1 
29      o 

i3<a  7 
27  23 
1111544 
26     7 

10:0=29 

24    43 

811144 

22     27 

5/49 

18  48 
1V324 

13    42 


25V345 
7«37 

19  25 
IX 14 

13      9 
25     16 

7T37 

20  16 

3«I4 

16  31 

on  4 
13    50 

27     45 
11047 

25  52 
9A57 

24      3 

8115  7 

22     10 

6:^     9 

20  4 
30152 

17  28 
0/51 

13    57 

26  46 

9V3I7 

21  31 
3«32 

15    24 


27x12 
9M   o 

20  55 
3T   2 

15  25 

28  9 
lib  15 
24    46 

8n38 

22    48 

7011 

21  40 
6A10 

20  36 
4nii54 

19  3 
3^  o 

16  46 
011121 

13     44 

26    55 

9/53 

22  38 
5V310 

17  29 

29  36 
11x33 

23  23 
5  KID 

16  58 
28    51 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  I>LACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1860-1861 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

I 

IOT55 

0      f 
27  b  II 

0      t 
19025 

0      t 
10  A  46 

0      t 
1911R44 

0      f 
1211154 

0      1 
19/44 

0      t 
6»47 

0      f 
21K29 

2 

23     16 

10034 

3«B  2 

25     17 

4^20 

26    51 

2V546 

18     54 

3T20 

3 

5«56 

24     24 

17      5 

lonjj  5 

18     59 

10/34 

15     33 

OK54 

15     12 

4 

19       I 

8as4l 

i<a33 

25       4 

3^33 

23     59 

28      6 

12    49 

27      8 

5 

2n33 

23     23 

16    24 

IO=G=    6 

17     56 

7V3  4 

10XS24 

24    40 

9  b  10 

6 

16    31 

8A23 

inji30 

25    I 

2/   0 

19     50 

22     31 

6T30 

21     21 

7 

03552 

23     34 

16     45 

9^39 

15-    43 

2ai8 

4K29 

18    24 

3046 

•    8 

.15     33 

8np47 

1-57 

23     55 

29      0 

14     29 

16    21 

Ob  24 

16     27 

9 

0A26 

23     51 

16     57 

7/44 

IIV354 

26    30 

28     12 

12     35 

29     29 

10 

15     23 

8-38 

111136 

21       3 

24     25 

8K22 

loT  6 

25      2 

122556 

II 

011516 

23       3 

15     48 

3V356 

6«37 

20     13 

22       7 

7048 

26     50 

12 

14     57 

7"!  2 

29    31 

16     25 

18     37 

2T   6 

4  b  20 

20    57 

IIAII 

13 

29    23 

20    34 « 

12/45 

28     36 

0x29 

14       7 

16    .49 

4®3i 

25     57 

M 

13-30 

3/42 

25     33 

10^33 

12     18 

26    21 

29     39 

18     32 

iinji  3 

15 

27     17 

16     27 

7V359 

22     23 

24       9 

8  b  49 

12050 

2^58 

26    20 

16 

ioin.44 

28     55 

20      7 

4K10 

6t   8 

21     37 

26     26 

17    45 

11=^36 

17 

23     53 

IIV3   7 

2SS    4 

15     58 

18     17 

4044 

109524 

2nR46 

26    42 

:8 

6/46 

23       9 

13    54 

27     53 

o«4i 

18     10 

24     41 

17     52 

1 1 11127 

19 

19     24 

5«  4 

25     40 

9T56 

13     19 

10253 

9«n.i4 

2=^54 

25     46 

20 

1W49 

16     54 

7x27 

22       9 

26     13 

15     51 

23  56 

17    44 

9/37 

21 

14       3 

28     42 

19     17 

4W35 

9022 

osi  0 

8nR40 

211115 

22     58 

22 

26       9 

10K30 

1T13 

17     12 

22     44 

14     16 

23     19 

16     22 

5V354 

23 

8a  6 

22     20 

13     16 

on  0 

6aDi8 

28     34 

7-^49 

0/    5 

18     28 

24 

19    58 

4T14 

25      27 

13      I 

20       I 

I2TIP52 

22       6 

13     25 

0^46 

25 

IK  46 

16     14 

7«48 

26    12 

3A53 

27       7 

6ni  6 

26     23 

12     50 

26 

13     33 

28     23 

20     19 

9«S35 

17     51 

11:2:17 

19     49 

9V3   3 

24     47 

27 

25     22 

io«43 

3n  2 

23     II 

inR55 

25        20 

3/16 

21     28 

6K39 

28 

7T17 

23     18 

15    59 

6,a59 

16       5 

9»n.i3 

16     26 

3«4i 

18     30 

29 

19     21 

6nii 

29     12 

21       I 

0^18 

22      56 

29     20 

15     46 

OT2I 

30 

i«38 

i2®43 

5"5i7 

M     33 

6/27 

I2V3   I 

27     44 

12       14 

31 

14     13 

26     34 

28    4^ 

24     29 

9^38 

Oct. 


24T11 
6  b  14 

18  22 

0039 

13  7 
25    49 

8048 

22      7 

5^50 

19  58 
4'9i3i 

19     26 

4'^35 
19    49 

4»»157 
19    49 

4/16 
18     14 

1W42 

14  42 
27     18 

9»35 
21     38 

3>^32 

15  22 
27     12 

9T  5 
21       3 

3«  8 
15  21 
27    43 


Nov. 


10013 

22     53 

5®45 

18  49 
2,a  9 

15  47 
29  44 
14ns  o 
28  35 
13-23 

28  17 
1311110 

27    51 

12/13 

26     II 

9KJ42 

22  47 
5«27 

17    47 

29  53 
11K48 

23  39 
5T30 

17  26 
29  29 
lib  42 

24  7 
6044 

19  32 

23533 


Dec. 


15®  45 
29      8 

12  A  42 
26     27 

IOIIB23 

24  30 
8-47 

23     II 

7  "137 

22  1 
6/18 

20    zo 

4W   5 

17     28 

05:30 

13  II 

25  34 
7K42 

19     40 

1T33 

13     25 

25       21 

7  b  26 

19  44 
2016 
15  6 
28  12 
110035 
25  13 
9A    3 

23  3 


DM 


I 

2 

3 
4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
M 
25 
26 

27 
28 
29 
30 
31 


Jan. 


Feb. 


7nKio 
21     21  : 

5^33  I 
19    44  I 

3^52 

17  55 
I  /50 

15  36 
29  10 
12V331 
25  36 
8a26 
21      o 

3><20 

15  28 
27  27 

9T20 

21  12 

3W    7 

15   " 

27   27 

100  o 

22  54 
6<a  9 

19    48 
3*^47 

18  5 
2nP35 

17     12 
1-49 

16  20 


oin.40 

14    47 

28  39 
12/  16 

25  38 
8V346 

21  41 
4«25 

16  57 

29  19 
11K31 
23     34 

51^31 

17  23 
29  15 
lib    8 

23  9 
51121 

17  50 
0039 
13  53 
27  35 
II  A43 

26  17 
iinp  9 
26  13 
iiai7 
26     13 


March 


ioni53 

25  II 
9/   6 

22  39 
5V349 

18  41 
iai9 

13  45 

26  I 

sh  9 
20    II 

2T  9 

14  2 

25  54 
7b46 

19  40 
1O40 

13    49 

26  13 
80557 

22  4 
5*^39 

19  43 
40516 

19  14 
4-29 

19  49 
5111  4 

20  2 
4/37 

18    43 


April 


2V32I 

15  33 

28  27 

IO«52 

23  8 

5^15 

17  14 

29  9 
iiT  I 
22     53 

4  b  46 

16  41 
28  39 
10O43 
22     56 

53521 

18  3 
iSl  5 

14     33 

28  27 
12nB50 

27  38 
12^45 

28  3 
1311120 
28  25 
13/9 
27  25 
11V312 

24  31 


May 


7^24 

19  56 

2KII 

14  14 

26  10 

8t   2 

j  19    53 

I  b46 

'  13     41 

I  25     42 

7049 

20  3 

29526 

15  I 

27  50 
IOA57 
24      23 

811510 
22      21 

6^53 

21  43 
611143 

21     45 

6/39 

21     18 

5V3  34 
19    24 

25:48 

15     47 

28  23 
10K41 


June 


22X47 

4T43 

16    35 

28  27 

IOb22 

22  23 

4031 

16  50 

29  18 
119559 

24   51 

7<J157 
21     17 

41552 
18    43 

2=^:48 

17  6 
iin.36 

16  12 
0/48 
15  20 
29  39 
13V343 
27  26 
ioa:47 

23  46 
6x25 

18  46 

OT54 
12     52 


July 


24T45 
6b39 

18  36 
0041 

12     57 

25  26 
89510 

21  10 
4A26 

17  56 
inR39 

15  34 
29  37 
13^46 
28  o 
1211115 

26  30 
10/40 
24     44 

8V337 

22  19 

5«44 

18  54 

1  M46 
14  22 
26    42 

8T49 
20    48 

2  b  42 

M  35 
26    32 


August 


8D39 

20  59 
33535 

16     32 

29  49 
I3«J127 
27  24 
iinB35 
25     55 

10:2:21 

24     45 

9111    4 

23     15 

7/17 

21  7 

4V347 
18      15 

ISS3I 

14   36 

27  28 
loX   7 

22  34 
4*^48 

16    53 

28  49 
iob4i 
22     33 

4028 
16  33 
28  52 
119530 


Sept. 


249531 

7^58 
21     51 

6nK  8 
20     44 

5=^32 
20     23 

5"l  9 
19    43 

4/  I 
18       I 

1V543 
15  7 
28  17 
ii»i3 

23  57 
6x31 

18    55 

IT  10 

13     17 

25     16 

7«   9 

18  59 
0049 

12     42 

24  44 

795  o 

19  34 
2A33 

15    59 


Oct. 


Nov. 


29  A  54 
i4nRi9 
29  8 
14-14 
29     26 

14  "133 
29  27 
14/0 
28  9 
IIV554 

25     15 
8«i6 

21  o 
3x31 

15  51 
28  2 
loT  6 

22  4 
3«59 

15     50 

27  40 
9D31 

21  25 
39528 

15     42 

28  13 
iiSl  6 
24     25 

811513 

22  31 

7:Grl6 


22^22 

7  "139 
22    58 

8/  6 
22    54 

7W17 
21     12 

4«4i 

17  44 
0K27 

12     52 

25       5 

7T  8 

19  5 
Ob  58 

12    49 

24  40 
6D33 

18  29 
09531 

12    41 

25  1 
7A36 

20  29 

3n543 
17    21 

1-25 
15    53 

011143 
15    47 


Dec. 


0/57 

16  2 

OV355 
15  26 
29  32 
I3«ii 

26  23 
9KII 

21     39 

3T51 

15     52 

27  46 
9b  36 

21  26 
3n2r> 

15     18 

27     24 

99539 

22  3 
4A4O 

17  29 

onR33 
13  52 
27  29 
11^23 
25  34 
10  HI  I 

24  39 
9/25 

24  10 
8VJ48 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1862-1863 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

t 
April    1     May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

u          ,»     " 

0      t 

0         r 

0         r      '      0         r 

0         r 

0         r 

0         r 

0         r 

0         r 

0         r 

0      t 

I 

23V3I2 

I2X    4 

20X15 

5«57  1    8ni7 

22  OS  49 

27  A  4 

16-V57 

9/41 

18V348 

IOKI3 

15T47 

2 

7«i8 

24      58 

2T59 

17    54  '  20      4 

4il59 

9nR55 

011143 

23     49 

2x41 

23       18 

28    10 

3 

21      0 

7T33 

15     28 

29    45        I  an  52 

17     24 

23       2 

14      41 

7V358 

16      26 

6T  9 

IOb2I 

4 

4><i9 

19    51 

27     42 

iin32  '  13     47 

0115    5 

6:fi:27 

28      50 

22       7 

OK    I 

18     47 

22    23 

5 

17     13 

IW55 

9W45 

23     20     25     52 

13       7 

20         II 

13/10 

6x13 

13      26 

lb  13 

4018 

6 

29     47 

13     49 

21     38 

5QBI4  I     8A12 

26     33 

4^115 

27      38 

20     13 

26      39 

13     29 

16      8 

7 

I2T  2 

25     39 

3027 

17     19  1  20    52 

IOtG=24 

18  38 

I2V3   9 

4>(   3 

9T38 

25     34 

27    57 

8 

24       4 

7029 

15     16 

29     40  1     3^556 

24    40 

3/17 

26     41 

17    39 

22      23 

7030 

90544 

9 

5«58 

19    25 

27     II 

I2A22        17      28 

9mi9 

18      7 

iix  6 

0T59 

4W53 

19     21 

21     34 

10 

17    48 

iflB33 

9asi8 

25       31            1:5=28 

24     17 

3V3   2 

25     18 

14      0 

17      9 

105    8 

3A29 

II 

29    38 

13    55 

21     41 

9ti5   7      15     56 

9/25 

17    55 

9KI3 

26    41 

29     12 

12     55 

15     31 

12 

iin34 

26    35 

4«J125 

23     12        otn.47 

24    35 

2x37 

22     46 

9«    5 

iin  6 

24    46 

27    45 

13 

23     38 

9A35 

17    34 

7^43      15     54 

9V337 

17      2 

5T56 

21     13 

22    54 

6.a45 

1011514 

M 

5®54 

22     56 

IT15  8 

22     33  1     1/7 

24     24 

IK  5 

18     44 

3n  9 

40541 

18    58 

23       2 

15 

18     24 

6nB35 

15       7 

711134      16     17 

8x48 

14    42 

I  b  10 

14     59 

16    32 

111529 

6:0:12 

16 

lA   7 

20     30 

29    25 

22     36        1V314 

22     47 

27    53 

13     19 

26    47 

28    33 

14     23 

19        48 

17 

14       6 

4^36 

13^59 

7/31  1  15     52 

6  k  19 

10T39 

25     16 

80539 

ioil49 

27     43 

3^51 

18 

27     19 

18     48 

28     39 

22     12       ox  6 

19     26 

23      5 

jn  6 

20    41 

23     24 

11^30 

18     20 

19 

10  nil  45 

3m   2 

I3"li8 

6«33      13     55 

2T  9 

5«i4 

18    54 

2^157 

611522 

25     45 

3/II 

20 

24     24 

17      15 

27     51 

20    34     27     19 

14     33 

17     10 

00546 

15     31 

19     46 

10 11123 

18     18 

21 

8=^:^12 

1/24 

12/  12 

4x13      10K20 

26    42 

29      0 

12    46 

28     27 

3^36 

25     19 

3V333 

22 

22       9 

15      28 

26     19 

17    33     23      2 

8  b  40 

10047 

24    58 

Iin544 

17     49 

10/24 

18     44 

23 

611114 

29      26 

10V512 

0K36       5T28 

20    30 

22     37 

7A25 

25     23 

2  111 20 

25     30 

3«44 

24 

20     25 

I3V517 

23    51 

13     24     17    41 

2ni8 

40532 

20     9 

9-.19 

17         2 

10V528 

18     24 

25 

4/40 

27         I 

7x17 

25     58     29    44 

M       5 

16    36 

3njlio 

23     29 

1/49 

25       9 

2K37 

26 

18    57 

io»37 

20    31 

8T22      lib  39 

25    56 

28     51 

16     27 

7^46 

16      32 

9x31 

i6     23 

27 

3V3I3 

24      2 

3><33 

20     35      23     30 

70551 

ii<ai9 

29     59 

22       6 

IVJ   6 

23     29 

29     42 

28 

17     24 

7H15 

16    25 

2«40       5nj8 

19    54 

24     0 

13-42 

6/25 

15    26 

7K   4 

I2T35 

29 

I«27 

29      5 

M     37  1  ^7      5 

2Si  6 

6ns  54 

27     35 

20     40 

29   32 

20     17 

25       7 

30 

15     17 

IIT33 

26    29     28    55 

14     29 

20         2 

""133 

4V348 

13x21 

3T11 

7  b  22 

31 

28    50 

23     50 

'  100548 

3-5.23 

25     36 

26    55 

19    24 

DM 

Jan 

Feb.       March      April        May         June        July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      1 

0^            or            or            or            or            or 

0          r 

0         r 

0         r 

0         r 

0         r 

I 

in  17 

i5flBi7     230032       8TIR34      13=0=   I       3/49      12V313 

ex  3 

26T47 

0046 

I5®i3 

16  ,$153 

2 

13     6 

27     15       5«J135     21     32     26    49      18     41      27    27 

20   39 

10  b     2 

13       14 

27      7 

28    46 

3 

24    53 

9A2I      17     51        4-^48      1011157       3V340      i2a:34 

4T49 

22      50 

25      25 

8^59 

1011546 

4 

6flS42 

21     38       01IJ120     18    22     25     19     18     39     27     25 

18    28 

5ni6 

70525    1    20      53 

22    57 

5 

18     33 

4^  5      13      5       2niio       9/52  :     3»28  1  11K53 

itf39 

17      25 

19      17 

2nB55 

5-23 

6 

0A30 

16    44     26      4     16      9     24     28  1  18      2     25    54 

14     24 

29      22 

lA   8 

15       9 

18     10 

7 

12     33 

29    33       9=^15       0/15       9V5  2       2H17       9T27 

26     48 

IIO513 

13       2 

27     38 

iini9 

8 

24     45 

12:0=35     22     39     14    25  i  23    30     16      9     22    34 

8056 

23         2 

25       4 

10=0=26 

M     54 

9 

7nji  7 

25    49       611112     28    36       7*47     29    40       5«i9 

20     52 

4<a54 

711516 

23     34 

28    53 

10 

19    42 

9mi6      19     53      12V346     21     52      12T50      17     45 

20543 

16    52 

19     42 

7m  I 

13/15 

II 

2^31 

22     58       3/43  '  26     55       5K43     25     41      29     56 

14     31 

28  58 

2=0=22 

20    47 

27     54 

12 

15    38 

6/56  1   17     41      ii»  0      19     19        8bi6      111157 

26     21 

1111514 

15     17 

4/49 

I2V344 

13 

29     4 

21     10        1V546      24     59        2T41      20     38      23     51 

8A14 

23  41 

28     27 

19       2 

27     36 

14 

1 2 11152 

5W38      15     58       8H52      15     47       2049       5«B42 

20     12 

6:5=19 

1111151 

3V323 

12x23 

15 

27      3 

20     18       0x15     22     35      28     40      14     51      17     31 

211518 

19       8 

25     25 

17     46 

26     58 

16 

11/36 

5X  3      14     34       6T  5  1  lib  20     26     48      29     20 

M    51 

2ni  8 

9/10 

2X    8 

11K16 

17 

26    26 

19     48     28     52      19     22      23     46       80539      11^13 

26    53 

15     20 

23       4 

16     24 

25     15 

18 

11V330 

4K23      13^   3  '     2«23       6n    I      20     29     23     10 

9-25 

28     43 

7V3  4 

0K33 

8T53 

19 

26    37 

18     42     27       0      15       7      18       6       2Ai8       511B13 

22      8 

12/20 

21     II 

14     32 

22     13 

20 

iia39 

2T38      10T41      27     35        o<a  3      14     10      17     24 

5"l  6 

26     10 

5x22 

28     21 

5  b  17 

21 

26     25 

16       7      24       I        91149      II     55      26       8      29     46 

18     19 

10V315 

19    35 

11T57 

18       5 

22 

10M49 

29     II        6«59      21     51      23     44        811514      12^22 

1/51 

24     34 

3>^49 

25     21 

0041 

23 

24     46 

iib5o     19     36       35546       5^34     20     33      25     15 

15    44 

9X  4 

17     59 

8  b  31 

13       6 

24 

8T13 

24       8        1055      15     34  !   17     30       3^  9       8m29 

29    58 

23     41 

2T   2 

21     29 

25     22 

25 

21     12 

6nio      13     59     27     25     29     36      16       5     22       6 

I4V33^ 

S)iig 

15     54 

4013 

70529 

26 

3«47 

18       2      25     53       9.JI21      1 1 11557     29     25       6/9 

29     24 

22     51 

29     31 

16    43 

19     31 

27 

16       2 

29     50       73542     21     28     24     36      13TIII1      20     37 

M«25 

7T  9 

1  I2b52 

29       2 

iia27 

28 

28       2 

113238      19     32       3"R5o  1     7^37     27     24        5V328 

29     27 

21       9 

25     53 

II05    9 

13    19 

29 

9053 

I A  28      16    32  1  21       3      12/3      20     36 

14M20 

4«45 

8036 

23       8 

25    10 

30 

21     40 

13     34  ,  29     35 

4    55  1  27       I  1     5«5i 

28    55 

17     57 

21       2 

5Si   2 

7n»   3 

31  1    3®27 

25     56  1 

19     II                      21      3 

13T  5 

30513 

19       I 

D 

igitized  by 

Goc 

)Qle 

THE  PLACE  OP  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1864-1865 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov.     1     Dec 

0      t 

0      t 

0      ^ 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0            1 

0         r 

0      t 

0      t 

0       »     1     0       » 

I 

I-   8 

17^48 

1  10/35 

2SS41 

I2K    6 

4«28 

ion  36 

2705    9 

II11K54 

14=^39 

0/56         6>35S 

2 

13     29 

1/    8 

24     13 

17     10 

26      25 

17     56 

,  23    18 

9«Jlii 

23    46 

26    45 

13     53    1   20     47 

3 

26      9 

14    55 

1     8V316 

1K51 

IOT4I 

inn 

50549 

21       8 

5=2=39 

9in.  0 

27       3    ,     4  =  46 

4 

9mi2 

29     II 

'  22    44 

16    37 

24      48 

14    13 

,  18    10 

3"R   I 

17    35 

21     24 

10  V3  27    1    18     50 

5 

22    41 

I3V355 

'     7«33 

IT2I 

8«42 

27     I 

o,a22 

14    52 

29     39 

4/    I 

24       5    1      25^58 

6 

6/39 

29       I 

22     37 

15     55 

22      21 

9«B35 

1    12      25 

26    42 

II  "152 

16    53 

7«56    1    17       7 

7 

21     5 

I4ar2i 

7x48 

o«i3 

5n42 

21     56 

24      22 

8^35 

24     19 

OV3   3 

21      59    1       IT  16 

8 

5KJ56 

29     42 

22     54 

14     10 

18      44 

4.a  5 

6TIRI4 

20    34 

7f   4 

13     32 

6X15    '    15      22 

9 

21     4 

14K53 

7T46 

27    42 

106  27 

16     5 

18         5 

2  "143 

20     10 

27     23 

20     39    1   29     25 

10 

6SC19 

29     44 

22     15 

101150 

13     54 

28     0 

29      58 

15       9 

3V342 

liar  36 

1     5T   8    1    13  a  22 

11 

21    30 

14T  9 

6«  16 

23     36 

26      6 

9"B52 

11=2.58 

27     54 

17     42 

26      8 

19     39    j   27     u 

12 

6x28 

28       3 

19     49 

605  2 

8<a  7 

21     47 

24       9 

11/    5 

2SS    9 

10x56 

4«    5       ion50 

13 

21     4 

II«28 

2054 

18     13 

20     3 

3^49 

6ni37 

24     44 

17         0 

25     53  1  18     22    1   24     16 

14 

5T14 

24    26 

15     35 

0^12 

I  "856 

16       3 

19    27 

8V354 

2K    9 

10T51 

1      2n24    ,       7«B27 

15 

18    57 

70   I 

27    57 

12       6 

13    52 

28     34 

2/42 

23     32 

17      25 

25     41 

16       8    '    20     21 

16 

2«I4 

19     19 

1095    4 

23     59 

25    55 

1 1  "125 

16    25 

8«33 

2T38j 

10  b  16 

29     30   1      2A59 

17 

15       9 

IflS25 

22          I 

5^54 

Sr^  9 

24     39 

OV537 

23     48 

17     37  1 

24     30 

120B31        15     20 

18 

27     45 

13      22 

3<a53 

17    55 

20     38 

8/18 

15     13 

9X   7 

2  b  16 

8ni9 

25     II       27     28 

19 

ion   7 

25       15 

15     44 

0:Ji     6 

3"125 

22     19 

ossr  9 

24     18 

16      28 

21      42 

7^33   1      9»»r25 

20 

22     19 

7«a  7 

27     38 

12      29 

16     30 

6V34I 

15     15 

9TI2 

on  12 

40541 

19     40  ,    21      16 

21 

43522 

18    59 

9nB36 

25       4 

29     54 

21     17 

0  K  20 

23     42 

13     29 

17    18 

i"R37  ,      3^  5 

22 

16     21 

onB53 

21     40 

7  "153 

13^35 

6«r   0 

15      16 

7«44 

26    21 

29  36 

13     29  1    14     59 

23 

28     16 

12    51 

3^53 

20     56 

27     32 

20     43 

29    55 

21     19 

80553 

ii<a4i 

25     20  1    27       3 

24 

lOA  9 

24     54 

16     14 

4/13 

IIV340 

5x18 

14T12 

4n29 

21     9 

23   57 

7=0=15         911121 

25 

22       I 

7-  3 

28     46 

17     43 

25     56 

19     42 

,  28      5 

17    18 

3<ai3 

5n»29 

19     19  1    21     57 

26 

3"B54 

19     19 

1111128 

1V324 

io»i5 

3T50 

li«36 

29     49 

15       9 

17     19 

i"l34  1      4/56 

27 

15     50 

1 11145 

24     22 

15     17 

24    34 

17     41 

24     46 

1205    7 

27         2 

29     13 

14       5       t8     18 

28 

27     50 

14     25 

7/29 

29     19 

8X49 

I  b  16 

7n39 

24       15 

811552 

Ii=!>=i4 

26    53  1      2W   2 

29 

9^=^59 

27     20 

20     51 

13*29 

22     57 

14     36 

20     17 

6,ai5 

20    44 

23     22 

9/59  1    16       6 

30 

22     18 

4V330 

27     46 

6T58 

27     42 

20643 

18    II 

2-39 

5"142 

23     21         0=25 

31 

4^53 

18     27 

20    48 

.  15       0 

onj?   3 

18     13 

14     53 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April    ' 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec 

I 

0      t 
290:22 

0      1 
22T44 

0      t 

2«I4 

22n57 

0      1 
270535 

0      t 
I2I1S37 

0       f 
14-15 

0       t 
28111  7 

0      , 
14V339 

0      f 
20*37 

0      f 
13T  7 

0       t 
2i»35 

2 

13K48 

6«45 

16    30 

606  9 

io<ji   8 

24     30 

26       6 

10/34 

28    20 

5X  5 

28     15 

611 30 

3 

28      6 

20     27 

OII2I 

18    59  ; 

.22     23  1 

6=5:19 

8ni  3 

23     22 

I2SS27 

19    56 

13  b  27 

21     16 

4 

12T13 

3051 

13     49 

1^29  1 

411525 

18       9 

20     II 

6V335 

26      59 

5T  2 

28    32 

5®  45 

5 

26      9 

16     59 

26     55 

13     43  1 

16     18  , 

om  4 

2/36 

20     13 

11X48 

20     15 

i3n22 

19     50 

6 

9«54 

29     54 

90542 

25     46  1 

28       7  , 

12       8 

15     19 

4«^i5 

26      48 

5«25 

27    50 

3A29 

7 

23     28 

1205  37 

22     14 

7"S42  , 

9^55 

24     25 

28     23 

18     35 

IIT48    1 

20    22 

1 1  05  50 

16     41 

8 

6n52 

25     10 

4^34 

19     32 

21     47  ' 

6/57 

11V348 

3K   8 

26      41 

5n  I 

25       23 

29     26 

9 

20      5 

7S133 

16    43 

1-21  ! 

3^45  ' 

19     45 

25     31 

17     47 

II  b2l    1 

19    16 

8,a28 

liny  49 

10 

3flB  8 

19     46 

28     45 

13    10 

15     52  1 

2V349 

9«29 

2T25 

25      42 

3®  5 

21       8 

23     55 

II 

16      0 

inj?5i 

ionp4i 

25     2  1 

28       9 

16       8 

23     37 

16    57 

9n43  1 

16    28 

3>9J29 

5'^49 

12 

28     40 

13     49 

22     33 

6iri59 

10  /  39  1 

29     40 

7x51 

lb  17 

23     23 

29    29 

15     34 

17     37 

13 

iiSl  7 

25     41 

4-22 

19       3 

23     21 

i3«23 

22       6 

15     25 

60544  1 

12a  8 

27     28 

29     23 

14 

23     22 

7^29 

16     11 

1/17 

6V317  j 

27     16 

6T20 

29    20 

19     46 

24     31 

9=^i6 

1x11113 

15 

5TIR26 

19     17 

28       I 

13     42  1 

19     27  I 

II  X15 

20     30 

i3n  0 

2A33  1 

611540 

21       2 

23     10 

16 

17      21 

im  8 

9^56 

26     21  1 

2*52 

25     20 

4«34 

26    28 

15       5 

18     39 

2"150 

5/17 

17 

29    10 

13       7 

21     59 

9V3I7  , 

16     31  ' 

9T30 

18     33 

90543 

27     26 

0=2=32 

14     42 

17     37 

18 

IO-=r59 

25     20 

4/14 

22     32  1 

0x24  ' 

23     43 

2025 

22    45 

9nB36 

12     20 

26    40 

OV3  9 

19 

22      50 

7/51 

16     45 

6«  8  ' 

14     32  i 

7«57 

16     10 

5<J135 

21     37 

24       7 

8/47 

12     55 

20 

4^51 

20    45 

29     37 

20       7  1 

28     58  1 

22     10 

29     46 

18     12 

3^31   1 

5  "155 

21       3 

25     54 

21 

17       6 

4V3   8 

12V352 

4x26  1 

13T23  1 

6ni9 

130510 

onp57 

15     21   , 

17    46 

3V329 

9=5    4 

22 

29     41 

17     59 

26     35 

19       5  1 

28       0  1 

20    19 

26     21 

12     50 

27      7  , 

29    41 

16      8 

22     25 

23 

12/41 

2«!:21 

io«45 

3T58  , 

i2«38  1 

405  6 

9<n.i7 

24    53 

8  "154  1 

11/44 

28     59 

5x57 

24 

26      8 

17       7 

25     21 

18    59  ; 

27     12  ' 

17     38 

21       58 

6-46 

20     44 

23    58 

I2ssr  4 

19     38 

•25 

IOV3   3 

2XII 

10K18 

3  «  59  1 

iin34  1 

o<a5o 

4tTR22 

18    35 

2/40  1 

6V324 

25     26 

3T30 

26 

24     23 

17      24 

25     29 

18     49  : 

25     39  1 

13   42 

16     33 

oni2i 

14    48  ; 

19      7 

9K   5 

17     33 

27 

9«  4 

2T35 

10T43 

3n23 

90523  1 

26    15 

28     32 

12      9 

27    II 

2«    9 

23       3 

lb  47 

28 

23     58 

17     34 

25     51 

17     34 

22     44  1 

8n53i 

10.0=23 

24       5 

9V354  1 

15    33 

7T19 

16      9 

29 

8x55 

io«44 

I  05  20 

5^42  ! 

20     33 

22     11 

6/13 

23       2 

29    22 

21     53 

on38 

30 

23     45 

25     14 

14      40 

18    17  1 

2^26 

4m  0 

18    38 

6«36  ' 

13x35 

6  b  40 

15       8 

31 

8T23 

9019 

01TR34 

15     57 

lJ^26 

28     12 

29     32 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1866-1867 


DM 


I 

2 
3 
4 
-  5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
M 
15 
16 

17 
j8 

'9 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

27 
28 
29 
30 
31 


Jan. 


13046 

27  42 
11A16 

24  27 

71514 

19    39 
1:^:48 

13    43 

25  32 
711120 

19     II 
I  /  12 

13  26 

25  56 
8W43 

21  48 
5«io 

18  45 
2K31 

16    25 
0T23 

14  25 

28  29 

I2b34 

26  40 

ion  45 
24    48 

8aB44 

22  31 
6a   4 

19  22 


Feb. 


21921 
15  I 
27    23 

9^31 
21     28 

3»ni7 

15  6 

26  58 

8/59 
21     15 

3W49 

16  44 

OSS    I 

13    39 

27  37 


March 


April    I     May 


IIK48 

26 

10 

IOT35 

24 

59 

9»i9  1 

23 

32 

7n36  1 

21 

30 

5®i3  1 

18 

45 

2A  5  1 

15 

'3 

28 

7  1 

101547 

23    13 

5=^27 

17  30 
29   24 

II  nii4 

23  2 

4^55 
16    55 

29      9 
11V541 

24  35 
7«53 

21     37 

5^45 

20     13 

4T57 
19    48 

4«39 
19     23 

3n54 

18  9 

2as  6 

15  43 
29  2 
12SI  4 
24  51 
7nR24 

19  45 
1^56 

13     59 


25^55 
7m46 

19  35 
1/25 

13     18 

25     20 

7«32 

20  I 

2«50 
16  2 
29  41 
I3H46 
28      16 

13T  7 

28  12 
13  b  22 
28  27 
13019 

27  51 

II®  59 

25     42 

8A59 

21  54 
41529 

16    49 

28  57 
10^57 

22  50 
411140  I 

16    30 


28tn20 

10/13 

22      II 

4»?i7 
16  33 
29  2 
118:48 

24  55 
8  k  24 

22     19 

6T40 
21     24 

6«29 
21     39 

6053 
21     57 

60242 
21       I 

4^52 

18  14 
115  9 

13    42 

25  57 
7=^59  I 

19  53 
ini42 

13  30 
25    20 

7/14 
19     14 

IV5  2I 


June 


13W37 

26      2 

8«39 

21  29 

4^35 
18      o 

ir46 

15    54 

Ob23 

15     " 

0II12 

15     17 

OflBI7 

15  3 
29    25 

I3«J120 

26    47 
91546 

22  21 
4-V36 

16  37 
28  30 
1011119 

22  8 
4/    I 

16       I 

28-    II 

low  30 

23  o 
5«40 


July 


i8a3i 
1x35 

14  50 
28  19 
I2r  3 
26  3 
10  » 19 
24    49 

9029 

24     14 
8056 

23  26 

7<J139 
21     29 

4nR54 

17  53 

0:£^29 

12      46 

24  49 
611143 

18  33 
0/24 

12     22 

24  28 
61546 

19  18 
2a  4 

15  3 
28     15 

IIK39 

25  14 


August 


8r58 

22  51 
6  b  52 

21       2 
5018 

19  37 
3®57 

18  13 

2A19 

16  II 

29    45 
121558 

25  51 
8^24 

20  40 
211144 

14     39 

26  30 
8/23 

20  22 
2V532 

14     56 

27  36 
io»35 

23  52 
7K26 

21  14 
5T14 

19  23 
3«36 

17  50 


Sept. 


2n   5 
16     16 

00322 

14  22 
28      12 

IIA5O 

25      16 

81527 

21  22 
4^    2 

16      27 

28  39 
10 11140 

22  34 
4^25 

16^18 

28  16 
IOV325 
22    49 

5*32 

18    36 

2K   3 

15  52 

or  2 
14   27 

29  3 

I3»43 
28  21 
121152 
27     10 


Oct. 


11  OS  14 

25  2 

8A34 

21  50 
4^52 

17  39 
0^14 

12  38 
24     51 

611156 

18  53 
0/46 

12  36 
24    27 

6V524 

18     30 

oa49 

13  28 

26  28 
9H54 

23     47 
8t  6 

22  47 

7«45 
22    51 

7055 
22    48 

70B23 
21     36 

5^125 
18    50 


Nov. 


1 1554 

14  39 
27     10 

9^28 

21     37 

3»»139 

15  36 
27    29 

9/20 

21     II 

3VI  4 

15  I 

27  6 

9«22 

21      54 

4X47 

18      3 
1T48 

16  I 
Ob  42 

15  45 
in  3 

16  24 

I  OB  36 
16      30 

Oil  59 

14      58 

28  28 

III53I 
24       II 


Dec. 


6=2:34 

18  43 
om43 

12    37 

24  28 
6/19 

18  ir 
OV3  6 

12  3 
24      6 

62ei6 

18    35 

IK   7 

13  55 
27  4 
IOT37 
24    36 

9«    3 

23  54 
90   3 

24  21 
9®37 

24    39 

9AI? 
23     2? 

715  8 
20    18 

3^  3 
15  27 
27    35 

9^32 


DM 


Jan. 


Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sept. 


I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

'  9 
10 
II 

12 

13 
14 
15 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

27 
28 

29 
30 
31 


2111124 
3/13 

15       4 

26  59 
8V359 

21  6 
3a2o 

15  42 
28     13 

io>C55 
23     50 

7T  I 
20    30 

4  b  19 
18    29 

2059 
17    46 

20B43 

17    42 

2A33 
17       7 

I1517 
15       2 

28  18 

IltCfcIO 

23     39 

5m5i 

17    51 

29  44 
11/35 
23     27 


5V525 
17     31 

29  47 
I2ai5 

24  53 
7><44 

20    46 
4T  o 

17  27 
i«   5 

14  56 
29      o 

13015 
27  40 
120S  9 
26    39 

ii<a  2 

25  15 
915 10 

22   46 

6=2=  o 

18  52 
1 11125 

13  41 

25  45 
7/40 

19  33 
1W27 


13W26 

25     36 

7^59 

20    36 

3x31 

16  42 

or  8 

13  49 
27   41 

II  b42 

25  50 

ion  2 

24  14 
80s  26 

22  34 
6A3t 

20  30 
4nBi3 

17  44 

I:fi:     O 

14  O 

26  44 

9mi3 

21  28 

3/33 

15  30 

27  23 
9V3I7 

21       16 

35526 

15      50 


28  as  32 
"K35 
25       I 

8T47 

22     53 

7  b  14 

21  45 
6ni8 

20     49 

50B13 
19     25 

3A24 
17       9 

01540 
13  58 
27       3 

9-V56 

22  37 
5'»l  7 

17    27 

29  37 
11/38 

23  34 
5V526 

17     19 
29     17  I 
1 1  a;  24 

23    46 
6  k  27 

19    31 


3T  I 
16    57 

lb  19 
16      2 

0057 
15    57 

00551 

15  33 
29     56 

13^58 
27  38 
10T558 

24  o 
6=2=48 

19  22 

1 11147 
14      2 

26  II 
8/13 

20  9 

2W    3 

13  54 

25  47 
7«44 

19    50 
2K  9 

14  46 

27  46 

iiri3 
25     9 

9  b  34 


24  b  24 

9032 

24     48 

lOOB    O 

24  59 
9S137 

23  48 
7nR33 

20    52 

3^50 

16  29 

28  53 
iini  6 
23     12 

5/" 

17  7 

29  o 

IOV)52 

22  45 
4«4i 

16  41 
28  49 
IIK    9 

23  46 
6T43 

20         4 

3«53 

18  II 

2055 
18      o 


30s  16 

18    33 

3^39 

18  26 

2»547 

16    40 

o-  5 

13  5 

25  43 
8ni  5 

20     14 
2/14 

14  9 

26  2 

7W54 

19  48 
1x45 

13    47 

25  56  I 
8K13  I 

20  41  I 
3T24  i 

16  24 
29  44 
13  b  27 

27  34 
120   5 

26  54 
1 1  SB  55 

27  o 

12SI    O 


26  A  44 
1115  7 

25  4 
8^35 

21  40 
411122 

16    45 
28     55 

10/54 

22  48  , 

4  VI 40  , 

16  33  ' 
28    31 
10X35 

22  48 
5K  9 

17  42  I 

0T26  : 
13   24  ' 

26  37  I 

lOb   5  I 

23  49 
7050 


22 

7 

60Z 

36 

21 

15 

5^56 

20 

34 

5^ 

2 

19 

15 

3^ 

7 

16:2=37 

29    44 
1211129 

24  55 
7/   6 

19  7 
iW   I 

12    53 

24  48 
6x50 

19  I 
1K24 

14       I 

26  53 
loT  o 

23  21 
6  b  56 

20  42 
4038 

18    43 

2«B53 

17  8 
1^24 

'5     39 
29    49 

13T552 

27  43 
11=2=19 

24  39 
7"140 


Oct. 


Nov. 


2011123  ; 
2/49  I 

15  I 

27  2 

8V355 

20    47  I 

2x42  I 

14  44 
26    58 

9K28 

22  17 
5T27 

18    57 
2  b  45 

16  48 

in  I 

15  20 
29  40 
i3®57  ! 

28  7  I 

I2AIO  I 

26      4  ' 
91549 

23  24 
6^50  I 

20      4  I 
3m  6 
15     54  , 
28     28  ! 
10/49 
22     58 


4V557 

16  49 

28  38 
10x30 
22     30 

4K43 

17  13 

or  6 
13  25 
27     9 

II  bi8 

25  47 
10029 

25     17 

lOOB  I 
24      36 

8^55 
22     59 

6t545 
20     15 

3^31 
16    34 

29  26 
12111  8 

24  39 
7/   o 

19  12- 
IV)  14 

13      9 

24    59 


Dec. 


6x47 

18  36 
OK33 

12  41 

25  7 
7T56 

21     12 
4  b  58 

19  14 

3055 

18  ^6 
400  [6 

19  M 

4^^2 
18     51 

3^  7 
17      o 

o^?9 

13  38 

26  30 

9'»l,7 
21     33 

3/49 
15    ^7 

27  58 
9VI54 

21     45 

38^34 

15     22 

27     13 

9H  9 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1868-1869 


DMI    Jan. 


I 

2IKI7 

2 

3T39 

3 

16     23 

4 

29     31 

5 

13  «    8 

6 

27     15 

7 

11051 

8 

26     50 

9 

12®  5 

10 

27     25 

II 

12^38 

12 

27    35 

13 

1211R  9 

14 

26     16 

le 

9-56 

16 

23     10 

17 

6in  2 

18 

18   35 

19 

0/54 

20 

13     I 

21 

25     0 

22 

6V353 

23 

18     44 

24 

o«33 

25 

12     23 

26 

24     15 

27 

6KI2 

28 

18   16 

Feb. 


29 
30 
31 


or  30 
12  57 
25   41 


8b45 
22     14 

6n  7 
20    27 

5®  9 
20      9 

5A19 

20    29 

5»»»29 

20  12 
4-31 

18     24 

ini49 

14  49 
27    26 

9/45 

21  50 
3V)46 

15  36 
27    24 

9asi4 

21  7 
3X   7 

15  15 
27  33 
lOT   I 

22  43 
5«38 

18    50 


March 


2ni9 
16      5 

OOSIO 

14   32 

29  8 
13^54 
28  43 
131TR28 

28  3 

12:2^20 
26      16 

9  "147 

22  54 
5/37 

18  o 
on  8 

12      4 

23  54 
5«42 

17    34 

29  32 
11K40 

24  I 
6T35 

19  24 

2  b  28 
15  45 
29  15 
I2II56 
26  48 
100350 


April 


2488  59 

9A15 
23    35 

7"P57 

22       16 

6=0:29 

20  29 
471114 

17  40 
0/45 

13      29 

25  54 
8V3   3 

20  o 
i«5i 

13    40 

25    33 

7^35 

19  49 

2T20 

15  10 
28    19 

II  »46 

25  30 
9025 

23  30 
70538 

21  49 

5«5158 

20  5 


May 


4W  8 
18      8 

2^  I 
15  48 
29  24 
1211149 
25     58 

8/52 
21     29 

3«5o 
15  57 
27    53 

9»43 
21     32 

3^25 

15  28 

27  45 

IOT2I 

23    20 

6«43 
20     30 

4036 
18    57 

30228 
18      o 

2A29 

16  50 

ins  o 

14     59 

28  46 
12^22 


June 


25-47 
9m  o 

22  2 
4/52 

17    29 

29    53 

I2V)  5 

24       6 

5«59 

17  48 
29  36 
11K28 

23  30 
5T47 

18  24 
i«25 

14  53 
28  47 
130  7 
27  46 
i2aB38 
27     33 

I2A23 

27  2 
iinj{26 
25     31 

9:«:l8 

22      46 

5  "159 

18    -^e 


July 


1/39 
14  II 
26     31 

8V342 

20  43 
2»38 

14  27 
26     14 

Sk  2 

19  55 
1T58 

14  14 
26    49 

9  b  47 

23     12 

70   5 

21  25 
60s  8 

21       9 

6A17 
21     24 

6l1Jt2I 

21  I 
5^19 

19  14 
2ni44 

15  53 
28  43 
11/ 15 
23     34 

5V342 


August 


I7V342 
29  35 
ii«;25 

23     13 

5K     I 

16   52 

28  50 
IOT56 
23   15 

5W5I 

18    47 

2n  6 
15    50 

00s  I 

14     35 

29  29 

14  A  36 
29  47 
i4nR53 
29  44 
14-15 
28     20 

ii;m58 

25  II 

8/   o 

20    29 

2V342 

14    43 

26  36 
8a25 

20     12 


Sept. 


2X    I 

13  55 
25    54 

8t  I 
20     18 

2^48 

15  31 

28  30 

11047 

25     24 

90B21 

23  40 
8A16 

23  8 
8njl   7 

23  6 
7-56 

22  30 
6ni4i 

20    27 

3/45 

16  37 

29  8 
11V320 

23  18 

5«  9 
16  56 
28  45 
10x38 
22     38 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 


4T49 
17     II 

29    45 

I2»3I 

25     31 

8042 
22       7 

5®  44 
19    35 

3SL40 
17     57 

2111125 

17  I 

I:ii:40 

16         14 

011137 

14  43 
28    27 

11/46 

24  41 
7V313 

19    26 

ia25 

13     16 

25  3 
6M53 

18  50 

OT57 
13     19 

25     56 
8«50 


2i«59 
5n2i 

18  55 
20B38 

16    28 
Oil  25 

14  26 
28  31 
1211)141 

26  53 
11^  5 

25  13 
9]"li3 

23      o 
6/31 

19  42 
2V332 

15  2 

27  15 
9«M 

21       5 

2K52 

14    42 

26  40 

8T51 
21     18 

4«  6 
17     14 

on43 
14     30 


28031 
120S41 

26  55 
tiilio 
25     22 

9nj(3i 

23     33 

7^30 

21  21 

5T^  3 
18     36 

1/58 

15  6 

27  59 
IOV3  37 

22  59 

5«   7 
17       4 

28  54 
10K41 
22      30 

40^27 

16  36 

29  3 

II  «52 

25  5 
8044 

22  46 
7flB   7 

21      43 

6  A  25 


DM 


I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9  I 
10  ' 
II 
12 
13 
M 
15 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

27 
28 

29 
30 
31 


Jan. 


Feb. 


March 


April 


21 A  7 

5nB43 
20       8 

4  —  20  I 
1$     16 

I  »»157  i 
15  23  , 
28  35  I 
'W33 

24  iS 
6V350 

19     II 

I«S2I 
13      22 

25  15 

7X   3 

18  50 
OT39 

12     35 

24    42 

7«    5 

19  48 
2056 

16     31 

00B33 
15  o 
29  48 
14.JI49 

29  55 
i4nB50 
29     46 


14-17 
28  26 
1211111 
25  34 
8/37 
j  21     20 

'     3V349 

I  i^>      4 

28     10 

losr   9 

22       c 

3><49 

i   15     37 

I  27     26 

9T18 

I  21     16 

;    3«24 

!  15  46 
28  25 
I  11025 
1  24  50 
I  80240 
'  22  58 
7,5140 
I  22    42 

1      7Tr556 

23     II 

8-18 


23-  8  I 

7  "134  ' 
21     33 

5/  3 
18      C 

OV347 
13  8 
25     15 

7ai2 
I  19      2 

0K49 
12     37 

24  26 
6T20 

18     19 

o«26 

I   12     42 

25  9 

i     7050 
20     48 

'  4®  5 
•  17  44 
.     1A47 

16  13 
inj   o 

>6       3 

I  —  13 

16      22 

.  I  in.  18 

15  53 
0/  I 


13/40 

26  50 

9V3  33 
21     56 

4X  I 
15     55 

27  43 
9K30 

21  18 
3TI2 

15     13 

27     23 

9«43 

22  13 

4054 

I  17  47 
;  oazs53 
14  12 
I  27  48 
I  ii<Jl4i 
1  25     52 

I     I0T1JJ20 

;  25     2 

'   9^53 

24   44 

9  "129 
23     57 

8/  4 
21     44 

4>357 


May 


17V344 

o»  9 

12     17 

24     13 

6k   2 

17  50 
29  42 
11T41 

23  50 
6«  II 

18  46 

in34 

M  35 
27     47 

IIOBIO 

24  44 

8,^128 
22     22 

611527 
20     41 

5^  3 

19  30 
3m56 

18  17 
2/25 
16  16 
29  46 
I2V553 
25  38 
8x   3 

20  13 


June 


July 


August 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 


2x10 
14  2 
25    52 

7T46 
19     49  I 

2  b  4  I 

14     35 
27     22  ' 
101127  j 
23     48  I 
70224 

2t       II    I 


3T47 

15  43 
27  47 
10  «  4 
22     39 

5033 
18     49 

2  03  25 

16  21 
0,J132 

14  54 
29     23 


18  «    7 
0041 

13     35 

26     52 
IOOB35 

24     4* 
9.JI10 

23     54 

811547 

23     41 
8-29 

23       4 


5Sl  7 

1311552   1 

7^21 

19     10  j 

28      18 

21       19 

3"RI7 

12-37 

4/55 

17     27 

26   46 

18      12 

1-38 

ioni43 

IV3II 

15     48 

24     27 

13     54 

29     56 

7/58 

26     23 

I3"158 

21     14 

8x42 

27     51 

4V317 

20     50 

"/33 

17       6 

2K52 

25       0 

29     41 

14     48 

8V3II. 

I2«    3 

26     40 

21       4 

24       14 

8T30 

3«40 

6ki6 

20     22 

16      0 

18     II 

2b  17 

28       7 

,     oT   2 

I    14      20 

lOK    4 

II     53 

i    26      34 

21      56 

1  23     48 

1     90    3 

5W51 

21     52 

5®  4 
18     43 

2A49 
17     21 

2nvi4 
17     23 

2-37 
17     44  ; 

211138  I 
17       9 

I  /  15  ' 
14     53  I 

28  6  1 
IOV357 
23     28  1 

5«45  ' 
17     52 

29  50 
11K44 
23     36 

5T27 

17  19 
29  14 
II  «  13 
23     19 

5035 

18  3 
00B48 

13  53 
27     23 


11A18 

25     41 
1011529 

25  36 
10=2:53 

26  10 

iimi5 

25  59 
10  /  15 

24  I 
7V318 

20  9 
2«38 

14     51 

26  51 

8K45 

20     35 

2T26 

14  18 

26  15 
8«i7 

20  25 
21140 

15  5 

27  40 
100S28 
23     32 

6^55 
20     40 

411548 
19     19 


4  —  10 

19  13 

4  "121 
19      21 

4/    6 

18      26 

2V3I8 
15     41 

28  37 
ii«  9 

23  23 

17     17 

29  7 
10T58 
22    54 

4W57 
17  8 
29    28 

11059 

24  40 

7®3i 

20  33 
3^47 

17     15 

011559 
14  58 
29  12 
13-41 
28     20 


i3Ta  2 
27  41 
12/9 

26  19 

IOV3  7 
23     30 

6ar28 
19       4 

1  K22 
13  26 
25      21 

7T13 

19  5 
i«    3 

13  10 
25     29 

8n  I 

20  47 

30248 

17      2 

0S12S 

14  6 

27  5^ 
II  T»5  4S 

25      51 

10=2:     O 

24  13 

8III2S 

22       42 

6/51 

20      51 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1870-1871 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      t 

0           f 

0      ' 

0       / 

0      f 

0      1 

0          1 

0      t  ^ 

0      f 

0      / 

0         r 

0      f 

I 

4V337 

22SS20 

I)€    4 

i6t   7 

i8b48 

4022 

9A32 

0^53 

24  "133 

3V3IO 

22»50 

26x59 

2 

18       7 

4K46 

13      17 

27     59 

0046 

16    b^ 

22      52 

15      6 

8/43 

16     46 

5H28 

9T  8 

3 

lasig 

17         0 

25     23 

9«5i 

12     48 

29    41 

61TII25 

29    21 

22     38 

oa  3 

17      52 

21       7 

4 

14     12 

29       4 

7T23 

21     44 

24     58 

12  A  40 

20      II 

13  "135 

6V319 

13       3 

or  5 

3»    I 

5 

26     47 

IIT    I 

19     17 

3040 

7®i7 

25    56 

4-    9 

27    46 

19    47 

25     49 

12      10 

14     52 

6 

9H   5 

22     53 

i«    9 

15     43 

19    49 

91529 

18      17 

II  /51 

3«  2 

8K23 

24       9 

26     42 

7 

21     II 

4»45 

13       0 

27     56 

2A38 

23    22 

2  "135 

25     50 

16      6 

20     48 

6b   4 

8n35 

8 

3T  8 

16     41 

24    55 

10024 

15    47 

7^35 

16  58 

9KJ39 

28    58 

3T  4 

17    56 

20    31 

9 

^5       I 

28     46 

6n57 

23     II 

29     19 

22      5 

I  /24 

23     18 

11x39 

15     12 

29    47 

25633 

10 

26     54 

iin  4 

19     II 

6.a23 

i3nBi7 

6ni48 

15    47 

6x45 

24      9 

27     13 

iin37 

14      42 

II 

8tf5i 

23    40 

1041 

20     I 

27  41 

21     39 

OV3  4 

19    58 

6T28 

9»   9 

23     31 

27         0 

12 

20     59 

6®38 

14     34 

4nK  9 

12-28 

6/29 

14       9 

2K56 

18    37 

21       0 

50629 

9A29 

13 

3020 

20       0 

27     52 

18     46 

27   32 

21      12 

27     59 

15    40 

o«37 

2049 

17    36 

22       13 

14 

15     58 

3«J147 

11A38 

3-46 

1211144 

5>339 

nasi 

28      8 

12     31 

^4     39 

29    56 

5"RI4 

15 

28    54 

17     59 

25     54 

19       3 

27    55 

19    45 

24    42 

10T23 

24     21 

26     34 

12  A  32 

18     34 

16 

122611 

211530 

ionji35 

4"124 

12/53 

3«27 

7H34 

22     27 

eni2 

80538 

25     30 

2  —  16 

17 

25     47 

17     15 

25     36 

19     39 

27    29 

16    44 

20      8 

4  b  24 

18       8 

20    56 

8-552 

16     19 

18 

9<a4o 

2=0:     6 

10-49 

4/37- 

11V340 

29    37 

2T25 

16     16 

00514 

3^34 

22     42 

011144 

19 

23     4 

16     54 

26       2 

19     10 

25     22 

I2KIO 

M     31 

28      9 

12      36 

16    37 

7-   I 

T5     27 

20 

8ns   2 

I  "134 

II  m  4 

3>3i4 

8«37 

24    27 

26    28 

ion  7 

25       19 

oi»B  7 

21     45 

0/23 

21 

22     23 

15     58 

25    47 

16     48 

21     26 

6r30 

8  b  21 

22    17 

8A26 

14      8 

611150 

15     23 

22 

6-45 

0/    4 

10/6 

29     56 

3^55 

18     26 

20     15 

40541 

22         I 

28     39 

22       5 

0KJ19 

23 

21       3 

13     51 

23    59 

I2a4i 

16      8 

Ob  19 

211  14 

17    24 

6nR  4 

13^34 

7/21 

15       4 

24 

5"li5 

27     19 

7V327 

25       7 

28     10 

12     12 

14      23 

o.a3o 

20    33 

28     45 

22    27 

29     29 

25 

19     18 

10VJ31 

20    31 

7K19 

loT  4 

24      9 

26      45 

13    59 

5-21 

M"l  3 

7V5I4 

I3«3i 

26 

3/  12 

23     27 

3ari6 

19     21 

21     56 

6ni4 

90522 

27    51 

20     21 

29     15 

21     36 

27       6- 

27 

16    54 

6asio 

15     46 

1T17 

3«47 

18    29 

22       17 

1211?    2 

5ni22 

14/11 

5«30 

10K16 

28 

0V325 

18     42 

28       4 

13     10 

15     42 

oflB55 

f^Sill 

26    29 

20    16 

28    46 

18    56 

23       2 

29 

13    43 

io)<i3 

25       2 

27     41 

26    26 

19         I 

11^  3 

4/54 

I2V354 

i><57 

5T28 

30 

26    48 

22     15 

6b  54 

9046 

21947 

25    40 

19    13 

26     36 

14    37 

17     38 

31 

9^41 

4T13 

22       0 

16    45 

loinii 

9«54 

29    37 

DM 

Jan 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

Joly 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      » 

0      , 

0      1 

0      / 

0      1 

0      t 

0      f 

0      / 

0      f 

0       f 

0      f 

0      / 

I 

II  b29 

25n  9 

2^55 

18A14 

23  Tip  20 

15  "122 

24/5 

i7«  3 

6T47 

IOb28 

24043 

260343 

2 

23     18 

72518 

15      6 

inR3i 

7-31 

0/30 

9V310 

IK  20 

19     49 

22      45 

60530 

8<Jl  37 

3 

5n  9 

19    41 

27     34 

15     14 

22         8 

15      48 

24       7 

15     14 

2  b  29 

4048 

18     18 

20    40 

4 

17      5 

2<a20 

10,0.23 

29     23 

7"l  5 

o>353 

8a49 

28     44 

14     49 

16      41 

OAIO 

2nj:56 

5 

29      8 

15    16 

23     34 

13^54 

22     12 

X5     50 

23       9 

11T49 

26    55 

28      29 

12      13 

15     31 

6 

110821 

28  30 

m  7 

28     39 

7/20 

0*27 

7K  4 

24     31 

8049 

IOO5I7 

24      32 

28     27 

7 

23     46 

linR59 

21     I 

13^31 

22     20 

14    40 

20    32 

6  b  52 

20    38 

22      II 

7njii 

11-49 

8 

6A22 

25     41 

5-12 

28     20 

7V3   4 

28    27 

3T34 

18    57 

20527 

4.ai6 

20     15 

25     39 

9 

19      II 

9=^33 

19   32 

12/59 

21     27 

11K48 

16     13 

0051 

14     21 

16   37 

3^45 

9^56 

10 

2njii4 

23     33 

3"158 

27     25 

5«27 

24     45 

28     33 

12     40 

26    25 

29    18 

17    42 

24     37 

II 

15      30 

7  "137 

18     22 

IIV5  33 

19      5 

7T23 

iob38 

24     28 

8A44 

I2n]2  22 

2111  3 

9/37 

12 

29        0 

21     44 

2/41 

25     24 

2K20 

19     43 

22     32 

60520 

21     20 

25      50 

16    44 

24    47 

13 

12-44 

5/52 

16    52 

8*57 

15       17 

lb  50 

4021 

18     20 

4nRi5 

9^41 

1/37 

9V359 

14 

26     41 

20      0 

OV353 

22     j6 

27    57 

13     48 

16      8 

o.$l3i 

17   29 

23      51 

16    33 

25       2 

15 

1011150 

4V5   6 

M     45 

5><2o 

IOT24 

25     39 

27     57 

12    55 

I—  I 

1811II4 

1/326 

9«49 

16 

25      II 

18       9 

28     26 

18     12 

22     39 

7027 

90551 

25     34 

14  48 

22     44 

16      7 

24     13 

17 

9/39 

2:»   6 

"«59 

0T52 

4»45 

19     15 

21     52 

8irR28 

28     45 

7/16 

o«33 

8X12 

18 

24      II 

15     54 

25     21 

13     21 

16    43 

I2B    4 

4«^   3 

21     37 

12 11149 

21       43 

14     40 

2X     45 

19 

8V343 

29     30 

8>^33 

25     40 

28     35 

12      56 

16     25 

4^58 

26    56 

6V3    3 

28    27 

4T53 

20 

23       8 

I2K5I 

21     33 

7«49 

10024 

24     55 

28     58 

18     30 

II  /    4 

20     12 

IIH55 

17    40 

21 

7a2o 

25     56 

4T21 

19     49 

22     II 

7^   3 

IITTR45 

2nii3 

25     12 

4aii 

25      5 

Ob   9 

22 

21     16 

8T42 

16    55 

1042 

.  33559 

19    21 

24       46 

16      6 

9V317 

17     57 

7T59 

12    24 

23 

4)<5i 

21     II 

29     16 

13     30 

15     51 

I»134 

8-    2 

0/    6 

23     20 

1M32 

10    39 

24     27 

24 

18       3 

3  b  24 

II  «24 

25     17 

27     50 

14     43  1 

21     34 

14     14 

7a20  j 

14     56 

3«   6 

6023 

25 

OT54 

15     25 

23     22 

702  6 

io«n.  0 

27     52 

5  "122 

28    29 

21     14  1 

28       8 

15    22 

18     13 

26 

30     24 

27     17 

5012 

19       2 

22    26 

11  —  22 

19     26 

12V348 

b^   0 

IIT   7 

27    28 

005  2 

27 

25     37 

90   6 

17       0 

I  tfllO 

5njji2 

25     13 

3/46 

27     10 

18     36 

23     53 

9027 

11     50 

28 

7«37 

20     57 

28     50 

13     36 

18     21 

911132 

18     19 

11^29 

1T59 

6  b  26 

21     19 

23    40 

29 

19     29 

102B47 

26    23 

1^57 

24       9 

3V3  1 

25    41 

15       6 

18     46 

305  8 

5«a33 

30 

in  19 

22     56 

9»^37 

16      0 

9/    2 

17    47 

9M41 

27     56 

0055 

14    55 

17    33 

3J 

13     10 

) 

5A24 

I 

oni3o  i 

J 

2*30 

23     24 

12    53 

29    41 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1872-1873 


DM 


I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
M 
15 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 


Jan. 


I2T9     I 

24    35 

7-27 

20  40 

4"li7 
18     19 

2/45 

17    34 

2W39 

17  52 

3«  3 

18  3 
2H42 

16    55 

OT39 

13     55 

26    44 

9«i2 

21  22 
3020 

15     10 
26    57 


20  34 

2A30 

14    3« 
26    44 

9W  5 

21  36 
4^20 

17     17 


Feb. 


011129 
13  59 
27  47 
11/56 
26  23 
IIV3  8 
26  4 
ii«  3 

25  57 
10K36 

24     54 
8T45 

22  7 

5«  3 
17  34 
29  46 
11044 

23  34 

5flB20 

17  9 
29  2 
iiA  5 
23     19 

5nK45 

18  23 
1^13 

M  15 
17     29 

10 11153 


March 


24 1^28 
8/14 

22  13 
6V)25 

20  47 
5«i8 

19    52 
4M24 

18  46 
2T52 

i  16    37 

29    57 

I2«53 

25     27 

7041 

19  43 
108  33 

13  22 
25     12 

7A  9 

19     17 

inn  40 

14  19 
27   14 

IOt«=25 

23  50 
711127 

21  13 
5/    6 

19      5 
3VI  9 


April 


May        June    '    July 


August 


17V316 

15    36  I 
29    45 
13M49 
27     44 
11T26  I 

24     52 
7«59 

20  47 
3016 

15     29 

27     30 

90223 

21  12  I 

3«fl   4  I 

15  2  i 

27  13  I 
91940  I 

22  26  t 

5-32  I 
18     59  I 

2ia44  t 

16  45 
0/58  1 

15     17  , 
29     39 
13W59  I 

28  15  , 
I2a25 


26se26 
10K18 

23  59 
7T28 

20  44 
3«46 

16  33 
29  6 
11025 
23     32 

5®30 

17  21 
29  .11 
II  si  2 

23  I 
Snpil 

17     37 

0:G:24 

13      33 

27      6 

iim  3 
25    21 

9/55 

24  40 

9>327 
24     II 

8*46 
23       6 

7K10 
20     56 

4T23 


I7T34  i 
Ob  29 

13      9 

25     37 

1     7n53  t 

1  20      o 

I  OB  59 

13  52 
25    42 

7A31  ' 
19    23 
11922 

t  n    31 

25    55  I 
'     8^37 
21     43 
5"li3 

!     19        II 

3/33    ' 
18        18 

3V518 
18       26 

3«3i 
18    26 

3^   3 

17     17 

IT  6 

14  31  , 
27  32  , 
io«i5 


22»4I 

4054 
16  58 
28  54 
100547 
22     36 

4SI26 

16  17  ' 
28  12  I 
101913  I 

22  24  \ 

4^47  I 

17  26 
oin.26  ' 

13  49  ! 
27  39  I 
11/55  ' 
26  36  I 
11V338  t 

26  52  • 
l2S8r  9  I 

27  17  I 
I2K  8  i 
26  33  1 
10T31  I 

23  59  ' 
7«  o  I 

19  38  I 
1058  , 

14  4 
26   o 


I 


70B51 

19  40 

1A30 

13  21 

25  18 
71919 

19  28 
1^2:46 

14  14 

26  56 

9^54 

23  12 

6/52 

20  56 
5W25 

20  14 

5«i9 
20  I31 

5^39 
20  33 

5T  4 
19   7 

2  a  41 

15  46 
28  26 
10046 
22  50 

40B45 

16  34 
28  23 
ioili6 


Sept. 


Oct. 


22  A II 

4nRi5 
16     28 

28  49 

1 1^5:  20 

24  I 

611154 

20      o 

3/20 

16    57 

0KJ52 

15      6 

29  38 
I4«r23 

29  15 
14  K  6 
28  48 
13T12 
27  13 
io«47 

23  54 
6037 

18     59 

IQB    6 

13       2 

24  53 
6^43 

18     38 

01940 

12     52 


25 19 16 
7-52 

20  41 
3^42 

16  55 
0/18 
,  13  53 
I  27  38 
I  IIV334 
I  25  41 
'  9«57 
'  24  20 
8x46 

23  II 
I    7qf%27 

21  31 

5»i7 
18    41 

1044 
14  26 
26    50 

80258 
20    56 

2A48 

14    40 

26    36 

I     81941 

20    58 

3^30 

16    19 

I  29    25 


Nov. 


Dec 


i2ta48 
26  25 
10/  15 
24    15 

8V32I   . 
22     31 
6as43  I 

20  54  1 
5^    3  , 

19       7  ; 

3T   4  I 
16    51  I 

o«  27 
13  48 
26    54 

9045 
22     19 

480  39 
16  46 
28     45 

IOA37 
22     29 

41924 
16  28 
28     44 

Iltiiriy 

24    II  I 
711126  I 

21  4 
5^    3 


19^:;, 

3>5*= 

18    u 

2  =  5. 

17  3c 

I  «5i 

15  r," 
29    5: 

13  T  3- 

26  54 
10  a  3 
22    >, 

18  r 
0K3T 

12  4,:. 
24    5: 

18  41 
on  3: 

12    r: 

24       2C 

19  7 

11^' 
15  9 
28  4^ 
12756 

27  25 
I2>1I9 
27      21 


DM 


I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
¥ 
15 
16 

17 
18 

20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

27 
28 

29 
30 
31 


Jan. 


I2«25 

27  21 
I2K    2 

26  22 
10T19 
23    52 

7b   4 

19  58 
2036 

15      I 

27  17 
90225 

21    27 

3A24 

15    18 

27    10 

919  2 

20  57 
2^57 

15  6 
27  29 
10  nil  I 


Feb.       March 


23 

16 

6/48 1 

20 

49 

5V3I9  1 

20 

M 

5«27  1 

20 

48  i 

6K   4| 

21 

5 

O  t       I 

5T42 
19  52 

3«32  , 

16  46  I 
29    36 
120   6 
24     22  I 
360B28  t 

18  27 
0A21 

12     14 
24       6 
619  o  I 

17  55  , 
29    55 

I2:Ct     O 

24         13     ' 
611138     i 

19  17 
2/17 

15  40 
29  29 
I3V346 
28        29 

I3«34  i 

28  50 
14  K   8 

29  16 


14T  3 

28  24 

I2«I5 

25  37 
8032 

21  4 
30B20 

15  23 

27     i8 

9<aio 

21         I 

21954 
14   51 

26  53 
9^   2 

21  18 
3^42 

16  18 

29  6 
12  /  10 

25  32 
9V314 

23  19 
7«45 

22  29 
7K26 

22  27 
7T22 

22  3 
6«23 

20     17 


April 


3044 

16  45 
29  23 
110B43 
23    48 

5A45 

17  37 
29  29 
1119125 

23  26 
5^36 

17  56 
011126 

13  8 
26   2 

9/  9 

22  29 
6V3  2 

19  50 
3«5i 

18  5 
2K31 

17  2 
1T36 

16  6 
o«25 

14  29 
28  13 
II  036 

24  37 


May         June        July     I  August 


Sept. 


70B18 
19    40 

1A49 
13    48 

25  42 
7»»B35 

19  32 
1-37 

13  53 

26  23 

9"!  7 

22  8 
5/25 

18  57 
2VI41 

16  37 
0^:41 

14  5^ 
29  5 
13K19 

27  32 
11T40 
25    41 

9«33 

23  12 

6037 

19  46 
20038 

I  15     14 

37     35 

'     9«yi43 


21^43 

3nR37 

15     30 

27  27 

9^33 

21  51 
411126  , 

17     20 
0/36 

14     13 

28  10 

I2V322 

26     45 
iis:i4 

25     43 

10  K    6 

24     21 

8T25 

22  16 
',  5«55 
1  ^9     22 

2036 

'  15     38 
;  28    28 

'    IIOB    5 
1    23       31 

'     5<^45 

17     50 

I  29     47 

I  111940 


23nR32 

5-27 

17     30 

29  47 
1211122 
25  20 
8/42 
22     31 

6V345 
21     20 

6a  9 
21       4 

5^56 
20     37 

5T   2 

19  7 

2«53 
16  20 
29  30 
12D25 

25  8 
70B40 

20  2 

2<ai5 
14    21 

26  20 

8»9i3 
20       4 

1^54 
13  48 
25     49 


8111  3 

20     35 

3/29 

16  50 
oV)40 

15       o 

29     46 

14^50 

OK   3 

15  15 
0T15 

14  54 
29  10 
13  a  o 
26  25 
9029 

22  14 
4®45 

17  4 
29     M 

ii<ai7 

23  15 

S'TR   9 
17       o 

28  50 
10=^41 
22     36 

4^38 

16  52 

29  22 
12  /  12 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec 


25/28 
9V3II   I 

23  25 
8»  6 

23  9 
8x27 

23  46 
8T57 

23  49 
8  b  17 

22  16 
5048 

18  54 
10539 

M       5 
26     19 

8A22 

20  18 
21911 

14         2 

25  54 
7^47  1 

19  43 
im45 

13    55 

26  15 
8/49  i 

21  40 

4>353 
18     29 


2«3i 

16    57 

IK  46 

16  49 

IT59 

17  6 

i«59 

16  32 
00  40 

14  20 

27  33 
100&23 
22     52 

5^5 

17  7 
29  I 
101952 

22  43 
4^36 

16    35 

28  41 
1011155 

23  19 
5/54 

18  42 

1^45 

15  4 
28  40 
12^34 
26  45 
11K12 


25^^52 
IOT37 
25  23 
10  b    2 

24  26 

8031 

22  14 

5«B32 

18  27 

lA    I 
13     18 

25  21 

7»»J'i5 

19  6 
0-57 

12     53 

24  58 
711113 

19  42 
2/24 

15  22 
28  33 
11VJ58 

25  35 
9«24 

23  21 
7K27 

21     38 

5T54 

20  12 


4«29 
18    4c 

2  043 

16     32 
o®  5 

13  19 
26    13 

8^148 
21      7 

3"Rn 
15      7 

26  57 
8=5=  4S 

20  45 
211152 

15  13 

27  52 
10/51 
24      IC 

7W4^' 

21  42 

5=4; 

20      0 

4M15 

18      2S 

2T3!5 

16  43 

o«40 

14  3J 

28  15 
11O50 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1874-1875 


DM 


I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 

10 

II 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

27 
28 

29 
30 
31 


Jan. 


25014 

8flB27 

21  27 

4.aii 
16  41 
28   57 

iinp  o 

22  55 
4^45 

16    34 

28  29 
ioni34 
22    56 

5/38 

18    44 

2V316 

16  13 
o    32 

15       6 

29  47 
14K28 

29  3 
13T25 

27  34 
II  b26 

25  4 
8029 

21  42 
40043 

17  34 
o     14 


Feb. 


I2<a43 

25      I 

7W  9 

19      9 

IrSr      I 

12      49 

24  37 
611130 

18   32 

0/51 

13   30 

26  34 
IOV3  7 
24       9 

8«38 
23     28 

8X31 
23     37 

8T35 
23     19 

7W42 
21     44 

5024 
18     43 

I2B45 

14     32 

27  6 

9.a29 


March 


2IA43 
3n»49 

15     48 

27  42 
9^31 

21     19 

3m  8 

15         2 

27  5 
9/22 

21     58 

4V357 
18    23 

2ai8 
16    42 

1x31 

16  38 

1T53 

17  6 

2«  7 
16      48 

in  5 
14    56 

28  22 

1105  25 

24  7 
6A34 

18  48 

onji5i 
12  48 
24     40 


April 


6:£i:29 

18  18 
om  8 
12    .  3 

24  3 
6/13 

18  35 
1V313 

14  II 
27  32 
Iiai7 

25  28 
10  X   2 

24  57 
lOT   3 

25  13 
10  tf  16 

25      5 

9n33 

23     35 

9QBtl 

20  20 

3<a  7 

15  33 
27   44 

9nR44 

21  36 
3^25 

15  3 
27      4 


May 


June 


July 


9111  o 

21       3 
3/16 

15  39 
28  14 
IIV3  4 
24       9 

7«32 
21     13 

5>^i3 
19    31 

4T  5 
18     51 

3«42 
18     32 

31114 

17  39 
igs44 

15     24 

28  39 

ii,a29 
23    59 

6n)2ix 

18  10 

OtQ:  I 
II        50 

23     39 

5^34 

17     38 

29  52 
12/20 


25/    I 

7V557 

21       6 

4SS29 

18  3 
IK  50 

15  48 
29  55 
14T12 
28    35 

13  »  2 
27  29 
11050 
26      o 

90054 

23     28 

6A41 

19  31 
211R   I 

14  14 
26     13 

8^  5 

19     54 

1 11145 

i'3  44 
25     54 

8/19 
21       2 

4KJ  2 
17    20 


o«54 
14  40 
28  36 
12K38 
26  44 
10T52 
25      o 

9«  8 
23     13 

7015 


August 


21 

11 

4058 1 

18 

32 

1.^51  1 

14 

52 

27 

35 

lonp  0  1 

22 

10 

4-. 9  1 

15 

59 

27 

48 

9^39  1 

21 

39 

3/53 

16 

24 

29 

17 

12V332 

26 

10 

io«  6 

24 

18 

8K40 

23K   5 

7T29 

21     48 

5  a  59 
20      I 

3n54 

17  38 

IflSII 

14  34 
27  45 
io,Jl43 

23  27 
5»^57 

18  13 
0^17 

12     12 

24  o 
5  "147 

17  38 
29  37 
II  /50 
24     22 

7V317 

20    39 

4s:26 

18  38 
3X   9 

17  54 
2T14 

17  31 
i«   9 


Sept. 


i6«33 
0042 

14  33 
28  » 
110027 

24  32 

7«a23 

20  I 
2nji27 

14     42 

26  47 
8-44 

20     34 

2  7l\.20 

14  7 

25  57 

7/55 

20  6 
2V336 

15  27 
28  45 
I2a3i 

26  44 

IIK22 
26  18 
IIT24 
26  31 
lib  30 
26  14 
10038 


Oct. 


24039 
80B16 

21  31 
4A26 

17  4 
29     28 

1 1  "539 

23  42 
5^37 

17  27 
29  14 
iini  I 

22  50 

4/43 

16  44 
28  57 
11V325 

24  12 
7«23 

20    58 

5K  I 
19    30 

4T20 
19    27 

4»4i 
19     53 

4052 
19     32 

3®47 

17  35 
OA55 


Nov. 


13A51 

26    25 

8nji4i 

20     44 

2=2=39 
14  27 
26     14 

8ni  2 

19  52 
1/47 

13  49 

26  o 
8V32I 

20  55 
3«44 

16  51 
OK  18 

14  6 
28  17 
12T50 

27  40 

I2«42 

27  49 
121150 
27     36 

1200  I 
25      58 

9<a27 

22      29 

5"K  5 


Dec. 


l7nB22 
29  24 
1IA15 

23  2 
411148 

16  37 
28  34 
10/39 
22     54 

5V320 

17  58 
o»48 

13  49 
27       3 

10K31 

24  13 
8T10 

22     22 

6«49 
21     28 

6nx2 
20     56 

50032 
19     51 

3A48 
17     20 

01926 
13      7 

25  27 
7-30 

19    23 


DM 


Jan. 


Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 


I 
2 
3 

4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
14 
15 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 
27 
28 
29 
30 
31 


1  niio 
12     57 

24  50 
6/52 

19  6 

IV334 

14  18 

27  17 
loss  29 

23  53 
7M27 

21  9 
4T58 

18    54 

2  a  57 
17      7 

11122 

15  39 
29  55 
14®  5 

28  4 
11.5147 

25  9 
8nj;li 

20  50 
3-II 

15  16 
27     10 

811159 
20    47 

2/41 


14/46 

27  5 
9V342 

22  39 
5«56 

19  30 

3K20 

17  20 
IT  27 

15  37 
29  48 
13^57 

28  3 
i2n  6 
26     3 

90054 

23  36 
rsi  7 

20  25 

3np28 

16  15 
28    45 

11:5:      I 

23        4 

4m.58 

16  47 
28  36 
10/30 


22/35 
4V354 

17  33 
0x34 

13  59 
27  46 
IIK55 
26     19 

10T53 
25  31 
10  «    6 

24  34 
8n52 

22  56 
60046 

20     22 

3A44 
16    51 

29    45 

I21IR25 

24  53 
7-  9 

19  16 
I  "113 

13      5 

24  54 
6/44 

18    38 

0V342 

12     59 

25  35 


8«32 
21     55 

5K44 
19    58 

4T33 
19     25 

4«26 
19     26 

4ni8 
18     55 

30012 
17      7 

o<a4o 
13   52 

26  45 
911J122 

21     45 

3=^57 

16  o 

27  56 

9  "149 
21     38 

3/28 
15  20 
27     i6 

9V322 
21     39 

4«i2 

17  4 
OK  20 


14  X  I 
28  8 
12T42 
27  36 
I2b44 

27  58 
130   7 

28  2 
120034 
26     41 

I0A20 

23  32 
6n){20 

18    49 

!:«:     2 

13       4 

24  59 
611149 

18     38 
0/28 

12  20 
24     18 

6V32I 

18     33 

OSS55 

13  30 
26     22 

9x32 

23      5 

7T   2 

21     23 


6b  6 
21       8 

6ni9 
21     30 

60030 
21     II 

5A26 
19     12 

2IIB29 
15      19 

27  47 
9-58 

21  56 
3"146 

15     36 

27  25 
9/17 

21  16 
3V322 

15  36 

28  o 

10x34 

23  19 
6KI8 

19   31 

3T   I 

16  50 
Ob  58 

15  26 
on  10 


150  5 

OOD    2 

14  53 
29    29 

13^42 
27  29 

1011)148 

23  41 

6-II 
18     23 

011122 
12     14 

24  3 
5/55 

17  52 
29  57 
12H14 

24  42 

7r«:22 
20        13 

3KI6 
16  30 
29  56 
I3T33 
27        23 

II  b26 

25  41 
ion  6 

24     39 

90iM2 
23      41 


7A58 

21  58 

5nP36 

18  50 

I:ii:4l 

14  II 
26     25 

8ni25 
20     18 

2/   9 

14  3 
26      3 

8KJ15 
20    40 

3«2I 

16  17 
29    28 

I2K54 

26  31 
IOTI9 

24   14 

8  b  16 

22  24 

6035 

20    47 

530  o 

19  8 
3.JI10 

17  I 

om?37 

13     5^ 


26nji58 

9-40 

22       6 

4in.i8 

16     18 

28     12 

10/3 

21     57 

3V358 

16  12 

28  41 
lias  28 
24     36 

8x   4 

21  50 

5T53 
20      7 

4  b  29 
18     54 

3018 

17  36 
10047 

15     49 

29  38 
13.^15 
26     39 

9np49 

22  46 
5-29 

17     58 


onii5 

12  21 

24     19 
6/12 

18  2 
29  55 
IIV355 
24       6 

6«32 

19  19 
2K28 

16        2 

or  I 

14  22 
29        I 

13  b  50 
28  43 
13031 

28  8 
120029 
26    30 

10  A  12 

^3     34 
6nji39 

19  28 

2=^  3 

14  27 
26    42 

811148 

20  48 
2/42 


14^33 

26  23 
8Wi6 

20     14 

2X21 

14     43 

27  23 
10K26 

23     55 

7T52 
22     17 

7b  6 
22     13 

7n27 
22    39 

7®39 

22  17 
6^30 

20     15 

3nR35 

16  31 

29      9 

11:^5:31 

23  41 

5  "144 

17  41 

29     34 
11/26 

23     17 
5V3IO 


17W  5 
29  5 
ii«i3 

23    33 

6k   8 

19  3 
2T21 

16      7 

Ob  22 

15      4 

on  9 

15  28 
00050 

16  3 
0^57 

15  25 
29    22 

I2njj49 

25  48 

8rG:24 

20  42 

2T1147 

14    43 

26  35 
8/25 

20  16 
2V310 

14      8 

26  II 
8«i9 

20    36 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON   FOR  THE  YEARS   1876-1877 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct.     ' 

Nov. 

I>ec 

0      f 

0       1 

0           r 

0          r 

0       '    \ 

0      f 

0            t 

0      t 

0      / 

0        1     J 

0       ,    1 

0        f 

I 

3X   2 

22T    3 

i6b23 

93348 

i8.a4i 

8:G=42 

i3inio 

28/6 

12  as  22 

15x16 

3bi3  ; 

ion  15 

2 

15     40 

5«38 

0023 

23       56 

2TTRI9 

21       21 

25    19 

9V358 

24     32 

28       4  1 

17    16  . 

25     10 

3 

28     34 

19     31 

14     31 

7A57 

15     39 

3^47 

7/20 

21     51 

6x52 

iiT  9 

ID36  ' 

lOOB    9 

4 

11T47 

3041 

28     45 

21       47 

28     45 

16       4 

19    16 

3=^48 

19     23 

24     31 

16      5 

25       3 

5 

25     22 

18       8 

13®  2 

5"B27 

11^38 

28     13 

IV5  9 

15     49 

2T  8 

8b    8 

0036 

9A44 

6 

9  b  22 

20346 

27     21 

18     54 

24     20 

10/15 

13         2 

27     57 

15       5 

21     58  ' 

15      5  , 

24        6 

7 

23     47 

17     32 

11A36 

2.GrIO 

611151 

22     13 

24     54 

10x13 

28     16 

5058 

29    26 

811V   9 

8 

8n34 

2,JII7 

25     43 

15      12 

19     12 

4V3   7 

6s:49 

22     39 

Iib4i 

20       5 

I3A35 

21      51 

9 

23     38 

16    54 

9"»39 

28     0 

1/24 

15     59 

18     48 

5T17 

25     19 

40BI5 

27    33 

5=-i5 

10 

82zt49 

111R15 

23     20 

10 11135 

13     28 

27     51 

0x53 

18       9 

9011 

18     27 

111519 

18      22 

II 

23     58 

15     15 

6^43 

22      58 

25     26 

95=45 

13       7 

I  bi8 

23     15 

2A37 

24    53 

I  W116 

12 

8<a53 

28    51 

19     47 

5/    8 

7VS20 

21     45 

25     33 

14     45 

7®30 

16    44 

8:^15 

13      57 

13 

23     25 

12^   I 

211132 

17      10 

19     12 

3x54 

8T16 

28     Zi 

21     54 

011JJ47 

21     27 

26     28 

14 

7nR3i 

24     49 

15       0 

29       5 

la  5 

16     17 

21     19 

12042 

6A22 

14     43 

411128 

8/50 

15 

21       6 

7WI16 

27     13 

10V358 

13       4 

28     59 

4  b  46 

27     II 

20    51 

28     31 

17     18 

21        3 

16 

4-13 

19     27 

9/16 

22     52 

25     14 

I2T   3 

18     39 

ii®55 

5"Ri5 

12-   7 

29    55  ' 

3V5    8 

17 

16     55 

1/26 

21     II 

4«53 

7x38 

25     35 

2059 

26    48 

19     30 

25     31 

12/21 

15        5 

18 

29     17 

13     20 

3^3   4 

17       5 

20     23 

9tf37 

17     44 

11^44 

3^30 

811139 

24    36  ( 

26      57 

19 

II  "123 

25     II 

14     59 

29    iZ 

3T32 

24       7 

23347 

26    32 

17     II 

21     32 

6W39 

85=46 

20 

23     20 

7V3   6 

27       I 

12x20 

17       9 

9n  2 

18       0 

linR    7 

oni33 

4/    8 

18    35 

20     33 

21 

5/11 

19       7 

9«i4 

25     31 

lb  14 

24     14 

3cflI2 

25      21 

13     33 

16    29 

OJS25 

2K24 

22 

17       I 

ia:i7 

21     42 

9T  6 

15     46 

93332 

18     13 

9=2=11 

26     13 

28     37 

12     13 

14       22 

23 

28     53 

13     40 

4K27 

23       4 

0038 

24     46 

2ns55 

22     35 

8/36 

IOV3  34 

24      5 

26    zz 

24 

IOV35I 

26     15 

17     31 

7«24 

15     44 

9.^45 

17     II 

5  "136 

20    44 

22     26 

6x   6 

gT    2 

25 

22     56 

9K    5 

OT54 

21     59 

00B52 

24     21 

0=2=59 

18     15 

2V343 

4«i7 

18     20 

21      54 

26 

5«  9 

22       8 

14     35 

6044 

15     52 

80530 

14     20 

0/35 

14     36 

16     12 

OT54 

5»  14 

27 

17     31 

5T25 

28     31 

21     29 

o<a37 

22     J I 

27     16 

12     42 

26     28 

28     16 

13     53 

19        4 

28 

OK    2 

18     53 

I2«39 

6as  8 

15    0 

5=2=26 

911151 

24     40 

8s:25 

10x34 

27     19 

3n25 

29 

12      44 

2«33 

26     55 

20    35 

28     59 

18     18 

22       9 

6V333 

20     29 

23     10 

II  b  12 

18      12 

30 

25    37 

iini4 

4«Jl47 

i2nB35 

011151 

4/15 

18     26 

2x45 

6t  8 

25    33 

3«Bi8 

31 

8T43 

25     33 

25     48 

16     13 

os:2i 

19    29 

18     34 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

.    April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec 

0        r 

0      1 

0      1 

0      / 

0      1 

0         r 

0      , 

0      , 

0      f 

0         r 

0      , 

0       , 

I 

3A48 

2611J127 

4=2:20 

2311140 

27/13 

ii«30 

13x20 

28T22 

16047 

240324 

1711J132 

26--  7 

2 

18      51 

10-34 

18    35 

6/41 

9W32 

23     18 

25     15 

II  b   3 

00333 

8A39 

1^58 

loni   I 

3 

3nB33 

24     13 

211124 

19    20 

21     38 

5^   7 

7T20 

24      6 

14    44 

23     II 

16    24 

23     47 

4 

17     52 

7^27 

15     47 

;  I  V540 

3«33 

17      2 

19    41 

7035 

29    17 

7nR55 

011146 

7/  19 

5 

1^44 

20     16 

28     44 

13  45 

15    22 

29      8 

2  b  23 

21     32 

i4<a  8 

22     46 

14     57 

20     36 

6 

15     " 

2/46 

11/  19 

25  40 

27     12 

11T30 

15      31 

5®55 

29      12 

7^36 

28    52 

3>535 

7 

28     17 

15       I 

23     36 

7«29 

9^   7 

24     13 

29      5 

20    41 

I4IIR20 

22     19 

12/25 

16     16 

8 

iim  3 

27       4 

5V339 

19     18 

21     12 

7  b  21 

130   7 

5.^44 

29  23 

611146 

25    36 

28     39 

9 

23    34 

8V5  59 

17     32 

I  K  12 

3T33 

20     54 

27     35 

20    55 

14=2=12 

20    50 

8V324 

ioac47 

10 

5/52 

20    49 

29     21 

13      14 

16     13 

4052 

1203  22 

611s  5 

28     39 

4/30 

20    51 

22     43 

II 

18     I 

2*38 

liar  9 

;  25    29 

29     13 

19     10 

27      22 

21       4 

1211142 

17    43 

3«  0 

4K32 

12 

OV5   3 

14     27 

23       I 

'     7T59 

I2»35 

30B44 

I2A24 

5^44 

26     17 

0V330 

14    57 

16     20 

13 

II     59 

26     19 

4H58 

20     45 

26     16 

18     26 

27      20 

20     20 

9/25 

12     56 

26    46 

28     II 

14 

23     51 

8ki6 

'17       4 

3b48 

ion  15 

ZSi   8 

I2IIR    4 

3  "155 

22     10 

25       4 

8x34 

loTii 

15 

55:40 

20     19 

29     20 

17       6 

24   25 

17     44 

26      29 

17     23 

4V334 

7«   I 

20    25 

22     26 

16 

17     29 

2T31 

IIT49 

0038 

80342 

211S  9 

10-34 

0/27 

16    42 

18     50 

2T25 

4«59 

17 

29     19 

14     54 

24     29 

1  14     22 

23    0 

16     21 

24       18 

13     10 

28     39 

0x37 

14     39 

17     54 

18 

11x13 

27     30 

7  b  24 

28     15 

lSii7 

o=G=i8 

711142 

25     36 

IO«29 

12     27 

27      8 

in  12 

19 

23     14 

IOb22 

20     32 

1    120515 

21     28 

14      0 

20    47 

7V348 

22      16 

24     24 

9b  56 

14    52 

20 

5T27 

23     34 

3054 

26      19 

5nJl34 

27    28 

3/36 

19     50 

4K    4 

6T31 

23      2 

28    51 

21 

17     54 

70   6 

17     31 

'  io<a28 

19     32 

1011142 

16     10 

i«44 

15     56 

18    50 

6025 

13®  6 

22 

Ob  42 

21       I 

102  22 

1  24     39 

3^23 

23     45 

28     32 

13     34 

27    55 

lb  23 

20      2 

27     30 

23 

13    55 

5®i9 

'5    27 

1     8np50 

17       5 

6/35 

IOV344 

25     22 

lOT    I 

14      9 

3®5o 

IIA57 

24 

27    34 

19    56 

29    45 

23       0 

011139 

19     13 

22     47 

7x10 

22     17 

27       9 

17    46 

26     23 

25 

11042 

4A48 

I4<ai3 

j     7^  7 

14       2 

IV3  39 

4«42 

19       I 

4b44 

10021 

i<a49 

101943 

26 

26     17 

19    49 

t  28     48 

'  21       5 

27     13 

13     54 

16    33 

OT57 

17     23 

23     44 

15    50 

24     56 

27 

110215 

4"B5i 

1311B25 

i     4'»153 

10/  II 

25     59 

28     21 

13      0 

OD  16 

70B18 

29     54 

8^58 

28 

26    28 

19     44 

27     58 

18     25 

22     53 

7«55 

lox   8 

25     14 

13     23 

21       I 

i3n»59 

22     51 

29 

ii«a45 

I2:iV2I 

1/40 

5V321 

19     45 

21     58 

7  b  40 

26     46 

4.^156 

28      4 

6"U3 

30 

26    57 

1 

26   28 

i  14     36 

19     35 

1x32 

3T55 

20    22 

IO03  26 

iS     58 

12-  7 

20      3 

31 

iin»53 

I0111I5 

, 

29     36 

16       I 

3024 

3nRii 

3/23 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1878-1879 


DM 


I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
M 
15 
16 

17 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

27 
28 

29 
30 
31 


Jan. 


Feb.    .  March  |    April 


16/30 
29  23 
12V3   4 

24  30 
6sr44 

18  46 
OK  40 

12     28 

24  15 
6t   6 

18  4 
otf  16 

12  47 

25  39 
8058 

22     42 
62552  , 
21     22  ' 

6.a  9 
21     2 

5n555 

20  41 

5^14 

19  29 

3ta25 

17         2 

0/21 

13  23 

26  9 
8V342 

21  3 


3«i4 
15  16 
27     II 

9M    2 

20  49 

2T37 
14  28 
26     27 

8«37 

21  3 
3n5o 

17  o 
o®37 

14  42 
29  12 
14  iQ  4 
29     10 

I411J222 
29  30 
14:^26 
29  I 
1311111 
26  56 
10/15 
23  II 
5V348 

18  8 
oai6 


I2se44 

24  7 
5><56 

17  44 
29  33 
11T24 
23  30 
5«24 
17     38 

on  5 
12    48 

25  52 
9"Ei8 

23       9 

22       8 

7"K  9 
22     22 

7-37 
22     44 

7  5»134 
21     58 

5/55 
19     22 

2V32I 

14     57  ' 
27     14  1 

9*16 
21       9 

2>€57 
14     43 


26x32 
8T24 

20  23 
2  «  28 

14  43 
27       7 

9043 

22  32 
50336 

18     57 

2,^139 

16  42 
ins   6 

15  49 

15  50 
oni5i 

15     40 

0/    8 

14     10 

27  43 
10V348 

23  27 
5«46 

17  49 
29  41 
11M29 

23     17 

5T  8 

17       6 


May        June 


29T13 
iib3i  i 

24  I  I 
6042  ' 

19     34 

2®37 

15     53  I 

29     20  , 

13A   2  I 
26     58 
iinj?   9  ' 

25  33  ' 
10^  9 

24     50 
9»n3o 

24  2 

8/18 

22       13 

5V343 

18  48 
18:29 

13     50 

25  55 
7K49 

19  39 
IT  29 

13     24 

25     27 

7«43 

20  13 
2058 


15057 
29  10 
I2®36 
26  II 
9<fl56 
23     49 


July 


7ns5o  1 

21 

58, 

6rQ=II  1 

20 

27 

4  "145  1 

18 

59 

3/  4  1 

16 

57  ! 

OV534  1 

13 

50 

26 

•47 

9  = 

S23 

21 

42 

3K48  1 

15 

44 

27 

35 

9T27  1 

21 

24  ' 

3W30  1 

15 

51 

28 

29 

11025 

24 

41 

838  14 

22  OS   2 

6<a  3 
20    13 

4nB28 

18  44 
3^  o 

17     12 

i»ai9 

15  18 

29     9 

12/48 

26    15 

9V327 

22  23 

5«  5 
17    31 

29     44 
11K47 

23  42 
5T33 

17     25 
29     22 

II  «29 

23     50 
60  30 

19  30 
2©54 

16  40 
OA47 

15     II 
29    47 


\ugust 


I4n)t28 
29       7 

13^40 

28       2 

i2in.io 
26     I 

9^37 

22  56 

5KJ59 

18  48 

I«25 

13     49 

26  2 
8h   7 

20       5 

IT57 

13  48 

25     39 
7W36 

19  41 
20   o 

14  36 

27  34 
io®57 

24     45 
9SI  o 

23  37 

8np3i 

23     35 

8^38 

23     33 


Sept. 


Oct. 


81n.11 

22     29 

6/23 

19     53 
3V3    I 

15  50 
28  23 
10SS42 
22     52 

4>^54 

16  51 
28     44 

10T35 

22  26 
4  b  20 

16  17 
28     23 

ion  40 

23  13 

6qs  4 
19  19 
3<Jl   I 

17  10 
inB46 

16  44 
1-57 

17  «5 
211127 

17      22 
1/53 


15/56 
29  30 
I2V3  37 
25  21 
78:46 

19  57 
1K58 

13     52 

25  44 
7T35 

19     27 

I  b2I 
13  20 
25      24 

7035 
19      56 

2<E30 

15  19 
28      27 

IIA59 
25  56 
IOII5I9 

25       6 

lO^II 

25  26 
10 11140 

25  41 
10/21 

24     33 

8V315 

21     28 


Nov. 

0 

' 

4«I4  1 

16 

39 

28 

48 

10x46  1 

23 

38 

4T28  1 

16 

19 

28 

14 

iobi5  1 

22 

23 

4038  1 

17 

2 

29 

35 

120519  1 

25 

15 

8.a26  1 

21 

54 

5"54i  1 

19 

49 

4-17  1 

19 

2 

3  "157  1 

18 

54 

3/44  1 

18 

18 

2V330  1 

16 

«5 

29 

32 

I2S 

E24 

24 

53 

Dec 


7^   5 

19  5 
OT57 

12  48 

24  41 
6»39 

18  46 
10   4 

13  33 

26  14 
g<a  6 

22  10 
5.^25 

18  51 
2nB29 

16  19 
0-^21 

14  34 
28  56 
1311124 

27  53 
12/  17 
26  29 
10V325 

24  I 
78:15 

20  7 

2K39 

14     .54 

26    57 

8T52 


DM 


I 
2 
3 
4 
5 
6 

7 
8 

9 
10 
II 
12 
13 
M 
15 
16 

^7 
18 

19 
20 
21 
22 
23 
24 
25 
26 

27 
28 

29 
30 
31 


Jan. 


20T43 

2«37 

14  37 

26  48 
9012 

21  51 
40247 

18  o 
I  A  28 

15  10 
29  3 
I3"5   4 

27  II 

II-«-22 

25  33 
911144 

23  51 
7/52 

21  45 
5V328 

18     58 

2«I4 

15   13 

27  57 
10x25 

22  39 

4T43 
16     38 

28  31 
10,^24 
22     23 


Feb. 


March 


4032 
16    56 

29  39 
120242 
26       8 

9.^156 
24       3 

8rni26 
22      57 

7-^32 

22  5 
611129 

20      42 
4/42 

18      27 

IV358 

15  14 
28       18 

1 1 8: 10 

23  50 
6K18 

18     36 

0T45 
12     46 

24  40 
6«32 

18     24 
0021 


April 


May 


June 


121127 

24  47 
70B25 

20     27 

17     50  I 
2r!j  12   I 

16     54  ! 

1^32  I 

16     54   I 

I  "153  I 
16     39  I 

1/    7  , 
15     12 
28V555 
12     16 

25  19 
8«   5 

20  38 
3m'o 

^5     13 

27     20 

9T20 

21  16 
3«    9 

15       o 

26  53 
8  II 49 

20     53 
305  9 

15     43 


280239 

i2,a  I 
25    52 

lOirniO 

24  59 
10-^    7 

25  25 
10 1^43 

23  48 
10/33 

24  52 
8V342 

22  5 
5«   5 

17  44 
ox    8 

12     2a 

24  -^3 
6T2I 

18  15 
Ob    8 

II     59 

23  52 
5047 

17  47 
29  55 
120BI3 

24  46 
7.^38 

20     54 


40536 

18     47 

3===  26 

18  27 
3"142 

ig       2 
4/13 

19  7 
3V336 

17     36 
la   7 

14  II 

26  53 
9>^i^ 

21     24 
3T24 

15  18 

27  9 
9b    I 

20  54 
2O51 

14     53 

27  2 
99B19 

21  47 

4A27 
17     24 

onB4o 
14     18 

28  19 
12-43 


27-27 

I2ni26 

27     30 

12/31 

'  27     20 

I  11V348 

25     51 

I     98:27 

I  22     37 

5><23 

i   17     49 

OT   o 

12       o 

23     54 

5»45 

17  38 

29  35 
11O39 
23     51 

65s  12 

18  45 

1<J129 

14  26 
27     37 

.IltiR    4 
,    24      46 

8-44 
I  22  57 
1  7"124 
I  22      o 


July       August 


6/40  ' 

21     18  I 

5V346  ' 

20         O   ; 

3«55 

17  28 

ox  38    ! 
13      26 

25     55 
8T  9  I 

20     11   I 
2  b    6 

13  59 
25     53 

7054 

20  3 

2  OB  25 

15  o 

27       51 
10^56 

24       17 

7"55i 

21  38 

5^35 

19     40 

311152 

18  7 
2/23 

16  38 
0V348 

14  50 


28V341 
I28:i7 
25  37 
8x39 
21     23 

3T51 

16  5 
28  7 
lOb  3 
21     55 

3050 

15  51 

28  4 
100232 

23  18 
6,0.24 

19    5i 
3"fi36 

17  38 
1-52 

16  12 
011135 

14     55 

29  9 
13^16 
27  12 
10V359 

24  35 
88:  o 

21     13 

4x13 


Sept. 


17X  I 
29  36 
IIT57 

24  7 
6b    7 

18  I 
29  52 
II  044 

23  44 
5^56 

18     24 

I  A  14 

14     28 

28       8 

I2TT!;I3 

26  39 
11  —  20 
26  8 
1011154 

25  32 
9/57 

24  4 
7V354 

21     27 

425^45 
17     49 

0x40 
13     22 

25  52 
8T14 


Oct. 


20T25 

2  b  29 
14  25 
26       16 

8n  6 

19  56 
10253 

14     I 

26  26 

9^13 

22         6 

6nji   8 

20  19 
4^57 

19  55 
5^1  4 

20  13 

5/13 
19     54 

4V314 
18       9 

18:40 
14     51 

27  44 
10x22 

22  48 
5T   4 

17  13 
29  15 
II  b  II 

23  4 


Nov. 


4054 

16  43 
28  35 
100232 
22     40 

5«n.  2 

17  44 

OTn:5o 
14  24 
28  29 
13-  2 
28  o 
I3"li4 
28  33 
13/47 
28  45 
13^519 
27  27 
ii8r  8 

24  23 
7x15 

19  48 
2T   7 

14     15 

26     15 

8  b  10 

20  2 
1053 

13     44 

25  38 


Dec. 


7®35 
19    40 

IA53 
14     20 

27  2 
lorn  5 

23  32 
7-24 

21  41 
611123 

21  22 
6/32 

21     42 

6V343 

21  26 

5«45 
19    37 

3^  2 
16       I 

28  38 
10T58 
23       4 

5«  o 
16  51 
28     41 

ion  32 

22  27 
40228 

16  37 
28  55 
11A24 


Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1880-1881 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec 

0         r 

0         r 

0      f 

0       t 

0      t 

0      1 

0            t 

0      / 

0      » 

0         r 

0         r 

0       f 

I 

24A  5 

14-14 

8  "153 

2V3I5 

I0«28 

29K51 

3«5i 

i8n  8 

2^  6 

5»«RI3 

23=^55 

1/2 

2 

6nB59 

28       6 

23      5 

16     15 

23  58 

I2T25 

15     53 

29    55 

14     25 

18     19 

8nii6 

16       3 

3 

20     lO 

12111  7 

7/15 

oat   I 

7X   9 

24     44 

27    47 

11QB47 

26    59 

1^46 

22     52 

IV3   9 

4 

3^37 

26     15 

21     22 

13     35 

20       6 

6«52 

9036 

23    46 

9nR50 

15     32 

7/35 

16        9 

5 

17     22 

10/29 

5>3  24 

26     57 

2T48 

18     52 

21     23 

5^54 

22     58 

29     33 

22     17 

02:58 

6 

1 11126 

24     48 

19     20 

10  X   7 

15     18 

0045 

3®ii 

18     14 

6=2:21 

13  "144 

6V354 

15      28 

7 

15     46 

9V3   7 

3«ii 

23      7 

27     38 

12     34 

15      3 

011547 

19     56 

28      0 

21     19 

29     37 

8 

0/21 

23     24 

16     54 

5T55 

9»48 

24     22 

27       I 

13     33 

3"l4i 

12/  18 

5«3i 

I3K23 

9 

15       6 

7«35 

0x27 

18    31 

21     50 

6®  9 

9^   7 

26    32 

17     33 

26     32 

19    28 

2O     47 

10 

29     55 

21     34 

13     50 

0W55 

3044 

18       0 

21     23 

9-44 

1/32 

10V542 

3^  9 

9T50 

II 

14V540 

5><i8 

26    58 

13       7 

15     34 

29     56 

3"»5i 

23     10 

15     35 

24     46 

16    36 

22      35 

12 

29     14 

18    43 

9T52 

25     10 

27     21 

I2A     I 

16    33 

611148 

29     42 

82:43 

29    49 

5«    5 

13 

I3«3i 

ir48 

22     29 

7n  3 

995  8 

24      17 

29    30 

20    40 

13V352 

22     33 

12T48 

17     22 

M 

27     26 

14     33 

4«5i 

18    52 

20    59 

6nB50 

12-46 

4/44 

28       3 

6x16 

25     34 

29     29 

15 

IOK57 

26    59 

17      0 

o®39 

2A59 

19     42 

26    21 

19       I 

I2ai3 

19    49 

8b   8 

11028 

16 

24      3 

9«   9 

28    57 

12     30 

15     " 

2-56 

ionii6 

3>327 

26    20 

3TIO 

20    30 

23     21 

17 

6T47 

21       8 

101148 

24     29 

27    42 

16     36- 

24     32 

18      0 

loxiS 

16     19 

2041 

5«5ii 

18 

19     10 

2059 

22     36 

6A42 

10T1534 

011142 

9/    5 

2«36 

24      5 

29     13 

14    43 

16     59 

19 

lb  18 

14    48 

4028 

19     14 

23    53 

15     12 

23     53 

17       8 

7T36 

lib  52 

26    37 

2S     47 

20 

13     15 

26    41 

16    28 

2111110 

7-41 

0/    3 

8V349 

IK  30 

20    48 

24     16 

89525 

10^138 

21 

25       6 

89542 

28     43 

15    33 

21     57 

15       8 

23     47 

15     36 

3  b  40 

6025 

20     12 

22     36 

22 

6056 

20    56 

ii.ai7 

29    25 

611138 

OV320 

8«37 

29      21 

16     12 

18     24 

2A    0 

4"»43 

23 

18     48 

3<a26 

24    13 

13^43 

21     38 

15     27 

23     12 

I2T43 

28     27 

09514 

13    55 

17        4 

24 

oaB47 

16    15 

7"534 

28    23 

6/49 

OSS22 

7x27 

25      41 

10028 

12       I 

26       I 

29      42 

25 

12     56 

29   24 

21     20 

I3"li8 

22       I 

14    57 

21     16 

8  b  17 

22     20 

23     50 

8nR23 

12—41 

26 

25     17 

i2nB53 

5^27 

28     18 

7V3   3 

29      8 

4T39 

20    34 

495  8 

5«^45 

21       5 

26       5 

27 

7A51 

26     37 

19     52 

13/15 

21     49 

12x52 

17    36 

2036 

15     58 

17    53 

4^12 

9  "155 

28 

20    41 

10-35 

4ni26 

28       I 

6«i3 

26      9 

0«  II 

14    28 

27     55 

onBi9 

17     56 

24      12 

29 

3nR45 

24     42 

19      4 

I2V530 

20     13 

9T  3 

12    26 

26     16 

loil  3 

13       6 

I  "148 

8/54 

30 

17       3 

3/37 

26     39 

3H48 

21     35 

24    28 

8flB    5 

22     28 

26     17 

16     15 

23     55 

31 

0^33 

18      2 

17       0 

6020 

20      0 

9^54 

9>5   7 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      f 

0      / 

0      / 

0      t 

0      » 

0      1 

0           1 

0      f 

0      f 

0      t 

0      1 

0       f 

I 

24V321 

16K54 

24K50 

I3«48 

i6n59 

iJl  3 

3nR20 

19-  9 

8/    5 

16V)  9 

9x40 

i8t  9 

2 

9rs28 

IT  4 

8T57 

26     36 

29       7 

12     53 

15     21 

I  "153 

21     48 

02:22 

23     55 

I  «4i 

3 

24     18 

14     45 

22     41 

90   4 

II95    4 

24     46 

27     34 

14     56 

5V353 

14     49 

8t   5 

15        I 

4 

8K44 

27     58 

5«57 

21     14 

22     55 

6nj:47 

10—    I 

28     23 

20    2d 

29     26 

22       5 

28       7 

5 

22     43 

io«44 

18     48 

30513 

4«a45 

19       0 

22     47 

12/15 

5«  7 

14X   8 

5«53 

lino 

6 

6T14 

23       8 

in  15 

15       4 

16     38 

1-30 

5^56 

26     32 

20      7 

28    47 

19     24 

23    30 

7 

19     19 

5ni4 

13    24 

26     53 

28     40 

14     21 

19     30 

11V515 

5KI2 

13T15 

2037 

6c   5 

8 

2  tf    0 

17       9 

25    21 

8,J145 

ionB55 

27     35 

3/32 

26     18 

20     13 

27     27 

15     30 

18      iq 

9 

14     23 

28     57 

705 10 

20     46 

23     27 

iinii5 

17     59 

11*32 

4T59 

II  b  16 

28       5 

0SI23 

10 

26     31 

iogB44 

18    57 

3"5  0 

6-19 

25     20 

2V350 

26    48 

iq     22 

24     41 

109524 

12        19 

II 

8029 

22     32 

0A48 

15     29 

^9     33 

9/47 

17     56 

"><55 

3  b  18 

7041 

22     29 

24        II 

12 

20     20 

4A25 

12    46 

28     16 

311110 

24    31 

32:10 

26     43 

16     45 

20     iq 

4.JI26 

6.:.    3 

13 

2QS    8 

16     26 

24     54 

11—22 

17       6 

9V326 

18     20 

iiT    5 

29     45 

20538 

16     iS 

17     59 

14 

13     55 

28     37 

7njli6 

24     45 

1/20 

24     24 

3^.19 

24     58 

i2n2o 

14     42 

28     II 

0—3 

15 

25     45 

IOITB57 

19     52 

8ni24 

15     46 

95:16 

17     56 

8  b  21 

24     36 

26     37 

lonc   8 

12     22 

16 

7S13^ 

23     28 

2-41 

22     14 

oV3i8 

23     '•6 

2T  9 

21     17 

69538 

8A28 

22     16 

24     58 

17 

19     37 

6-11 

15     44 

6;  14 

14     51 

8x19 

15     54 

3^50 

18     32 

20     20 

4^37 

7^155 

18 

111544 

19       4 

28     59 

20     20 

29     20 

22     21 

29     12 

16       4 

0,J12I 

2nBl7 

17     15 

21      17 

19 

14       0 

211110 

I2ni25 

4V328 

I3«4^ 

6t    I 

I2«     7 

28       6 

12       II 

14      24 

o"iii 

5/    4 

20 

26     27 

15     30 

26      0 

18     38 

27     52 

19     21 

24      41 

9OT59 

24       6 

26     42 

13     28 

19     14 

21 

9^  8 

29       4 

9/44 

22:48 

11X49 

2  b  22 

711    0 

21     48 

6tt5    7 

9-14 

27      3 

3>343 

22 

22      5 

12/54 

23     37 

16     56 

25     34 

15       6 

19       6 

3«^37 

18      17 

22         0 

10/55 

18     27 

^3 

5^21 

27       I 

7V339 

IX   0 

9T   4 

27     35 

IQ  4 

15     28 

0-37 

5"!  I 

25       I 

3«I7 

^4 

18     58 

IIV324 

21     49 

14     59 

22     20 

9053 

12     56 

27     23 

13       8 

18     15 

9V316 

18       5 

25 

2/59 

26       2 

6ss  6 

28    49 

5«22 

22       0 

24     46 

9nP24 

25     49 

1/41 

23     36 

2x44 

26 

17    22 

ios:48 

20     28 

12T29 

18       10 

4<Z5  0 

6  A  36 

21      32 

8ia4i 

15     19 

7^5^ 

17       9 

27 

2V3   7 

25     37 

4K50 

25     56 

0045 

15     55 

18     27 

3^48 

21     45 

29       5 

22     14 

IT17 

28 

17       7 

I0K20 

19       8 

9«    7 

13      7 

27     46 

011521 

16     13 

5/0 

i3>3   0 

6x26 

15       5 

29 

2«I5 

3T15 

22       I 

25     17 

9^35 

12     19 

28     49 

18     28 

27       3 

20    31 

28     35 

30 

17      22 

17       7 

4038 

72B19 

21     25 

24     25 

IIWI38 

2V3II 

112:12 

4T25 

lib  47 

31 

2X18 

o«39 

19     13 

6-41 

24     42 

25     25 

24     44 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1882-1883 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

C           f 

0         r 

0      1 

0      » 

0          r 

0      t 

0      f 

0      t 

0      f 

0         r 

0      1 

0      / 

I 

7027 

230329 

2SL2S 

16 11)}  48 

19=^30 

6/24 

I2V545 

6k   4 

29T44 

6n38 

240316 

26  A  54 

2 

19    59 

5«J127 

14      20 

28    48 

111157 

19    55 

27     12 

21       3 

I3»57 

20      7 

6A43 

8ni55 

3 

2021 

17    21 

26      12 

10=0=56 

14     38  !     3V542 

11*50 

5T48 

27     44 

30BI0 

18     54 

20    48 

4 

14     34 

29    14 

Sw  5 

23     II 

27     32      17     42      26     30 

20     13 

iin  5 

15    51 

onjl54 

2^39 

5 

26    40 

ilnR   6 

20     I 

5»n25 

10/39 

1*52      UK   7  1     4«i6 

24       4 

28     14 

12     46 

14     31 

6 

8A39 

23       0 

2^  0 

18    10 

24       0 

16      7     25     35  1  17    57 

60B43 

10A23 

24     37 

26     29 

7 

20    34 

4^57 

14     4 

0/56 

7KJ33  1     OK25  1     9T49  '     ini7 

19      7 

22     23 

6^=28 

811138 

8 

2IIR25 

17      0 

26    15 

13    55 

21     19     14    41  1  23     48      14     18 

I  .a  20 

4»»Ri7 

18     24 

21       0 

9 

14       17 

29     13 

8^35 

27      8 

5«i5 

28    53  i     7»3i  ,  27      4 

13   25 

16      8 

011128 

3/38 

10 

26      12 

1111140 

21       6 

IOV339 

19    22 

12T58  1  21       01     9®37 

25    23 

27     59 

12     40 

16    34 

II 

8^14 

24     25 

3/53 

24     27 

3^37 

26    56 

4ni4  1  22      0 

711817 

9^51 

25       4 

29     46 

12 

20      27 

7/32 

J6    58 

8«34 

17     57 

io«43 

17     16       4A14 

19      9 

21     48 

7^39 

13^313 

13 

211157 

21       7 

OV325 

22     58 

2T20 

24     20 

03B    6 

16    21 

1=2:     0 

3  "149 

20     27 

26    54 

14 

15      48 

5V310 

14     17 

7H37 

16      40 

7044 

12    45 

28    22 

12      51 

15     58 

3V529 

10x46 

15 

29      5 

19    42 

28    35 

22    24 

o«55 

20    55 

25     12 

lonjii7 

24    45 

28     16 

16    44 

24     45 

16 

12/49 

4«39 

13*16 

7TI2 

M    59 

33352 

7A30 

22        8 

611143 

10/45 

0*13 

8K50 

17 

27      2 

19    54 

28     16 

21     54 

28    48 

16    35 

19    38 

3^58 

18     50 

23     28 

13     56 

22     58 

18 

11W41 

5x16 

i3>(27 

6«23 

I2n20 

29      3 

inp39 

15     48 

1/    9 

6V327 

27    53  ;     7T   7 

19 

26    41 

20    33 

28     38 

20    31 

25   32 

11A18  '  13     33     27    43 

13     44 

19     46 

I2K   3     21     15 

20 

liar  53 

5T34 

13T38 

4ni6 

83D25 

23     23  !  25     24  '     9^47  I  26    40 

3*27 

26    24  !     5b2i 

21 

27      6 

20     II 

28     19 

17    36 

21       0  ,     5nji20  1     7=Jiri5      22       4      IOV3  0 

17     29 

10T54  '  19     24 

22 

I2K   9 

4«i9 

I2«34 

OflB32 

3«Jli9  j  17     13      19     II        4/40  i  23     47 

i>^54 

25    27  1    3n2o 

23 

26    55 

17    57 

26    20 

13       7 

15     25  1  29      6  '     1 11116  1   17     39  ,     8a  3 

16     37 

9  b  59  1  17       8 

24 

11T16 

in  7 

9n38 

25     25 

27     23  1  11-=  4  1  13     36  1     IV3  5  1  22     45 

IT33 

24     24  ,     OCB44 

25 

25     12 

13    53 

22     30 

7^29 

grrjliy 

23     12  1  26     15  1  15       I  :     7K48 

16    33 

8n36  !   14       5 

26 

8«4i 

26     19 

5®  0 

19    25 

21     II 

5"134  1     9/18 

29     27  1  23       3 

I  «30 

22     32      27      9 

27 

21     46 

8031 

17     14 

ixiftiS 

3=^10 

18     15  ;  22     49 

14x19  i     8T20 

16     15 

6fl3  6       9<a56 

28 

4032 

20    33 

29     15 

13     II 

15     18 

1/18  '     6W47 

29     29      23     27 

on  41 

19     19     22     26 

29 

17      2 

IIAIO 

25      9 

27     39 

14     44 

21     12 

14K47       8«i7 

14     43 

2Si  9       4nR40 

30 

29     19 

23      I 

7-14 

1011116I 

28     34 

5«59 

OT  2     22     41 

28     19 

14     40  '  16    42 

31 

II3D27 

4nJi53 

23     II 

20     59 

15       4 

1 1 03  30 

28     35 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

AprU 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec 

I 

0      t 

IOii:25 

0      f 
2411110 

0      f 
2/22 

0        r 

I9V32I 

0         ; 
26x11 

0      / 
19T13 

0       t 
28  «    9 

0      f 
190338 

0      ' 
7"B37 

0       » 
10=0=44 

0      f 
24"158 

0      t 
28/0 

2 

22      16 

6/35 

14    44 

2W5I 

IOK22 

3«5o 

I2n24       2^59     19    57  ,  22     36  1 

6/50       IOV32'> 

3 

4WII4 

19    22 

27    27 

16    49 

24    54 

18    32 

26    32  1  16      5 

2^  5  1     4"124 

18     49      22     51 

4 

16      24 

2V535 

10V536 

IK  14 

9T43      3nii 

100329  1  28    54 

14       3      16     10 

OV356 

5«34 

5 

28      51 

16     16 

24    14 

16       3 

24     43      17    42 

24     II  ,  1111528 

25     54  1  27     58 

13     15 

18     31 

6 

"/37 

oa24 

8a;  22 

IT  9 

9«46  1     1057 

7  Si  34  ;  23    46 

711141        9/50 

25     48 

1K43 

7 

24    47 

H    54 

22     57 

16    23 

24     43  1  15     53  1  20     37  ,     5^50  1 

19     28      21     52 

8x40 

15     13 

8 

8V519 

29    41 

7^53 

i«34       9n26  ;  29     26  1     3nR20  1  17     44  |     i  /  19  ,     4^^   7  I 

21     53  !  29       I 

9 

22     12 

14H34 

23       I 

16    35 

23     49      12^35      15     44  (  29     33      13     21      16     40  I     5K30      13T10 

10 

6«22 

29    26 

8T13 

in  15 

70347  1  25     20  1  27     52  1  1X1^21      25     38      29     36      iq     32      27     37 

II 

20    43 

14T  9 

23     16 

15     32 

21     19  '     7nB45       9=2=48     23     14       8V3I4  '  I2«57       3T59  ;   I2«20 

12 

5X  9 

28    36 

8«   4 

29    22 

4A25  1  19     54     21     38       5/17  j  21     15      26    46  1 

18     48      27     51 

13 

19    35 

12^46 

22    30 

122Q46 

17      8  1     i=Ji=50  1 

3'n27      17     35       4«43  '  "  >^   2 

3b52      I2ni3 

14 

3r55 

26    36 

6n33 

25     46     29    31      13    41 

15     20  1    0W14      18    38  1  25     43  1 

19      4      27      7 

^5 

18      6 

ion  9    20    II 

8A25      iinB39  1  25     29 

27     23  1  13     15       2K59  '  10T43  1 

4ni5      i'i«a47 

16 

2b    8 

23    27      33028 

20     47      23     35        711121        9/39  I  26     41      17     40      25     54  1 

19     14      26       5 

17 

15    59 

69330    16   24 

2nR55 

5=2:25  '  19     20     22     13  1  10*30       2T34      II «    6 

3®  53        9«^8 

18 

29    40 

19    20 

29      5 

M     54 

17     13  1     1^30       5^  6  1  24     40      17     33     26      9  1 

18       7  '  23     23 

19 

13011 

2a  0 

11^31 

26     47 

29      3      13    53      18    20       9K   5       2«28     ion 57  ,     1JI53       c»"S2o 

20 

26    32 

14   29 

23    46 

8^36     1011157     26    32  1     1*52     23    39  '  17    12     25    23  1  15    10     IS    53 

21 

9©43 

26   49 

5"S53 

20     25      22     58  1     9V326      15     40       8T15  ;     in4i        9®23     28       2        1===   7 

22 

22    43 

8nR59 

17    53 

211I15        5^9      22     36  I  29     41  !  22     47  1  15     50      22     58      1011x31       13       6 

23 

5«a3i 

21       1 

29    47 

14      9      17     31        5«59  1 

13 K 49  1     7«ii      29     39       6,Jl   9     22     43      24     50 

24 

18      6 

2^56 

11-37 

26      8 

OV3  5      19     34 

28       I      21     24      130B  9      18     58       4^42        611142 

25 

01IR28 

14     46 

23     25 

8/16 

12     53  ,     3K20 

12T14       5024      26     21        10528      16     32      18     29 

26 

12    38 

26     33 

5  "114 

20     34 

25    54      17     14 

26     24      19     12  1     QJI16      13     44     28     19        0/22 

27 

24    37 

811122 

17       6 

3V3  4 

9*10  1 

IT  16 

iob3i        20B47  J 

21     56     25     48  ;  loni  5      12     23 

28 

6=2:29 

20     16 

29       4 

15     51      22     41 

15     24  1 

24     33      16     10 

411524       7-44  1  21     54      24     36 

29 

18    17 

II  /  13 

28     57       6x27 

29    36      8  n  31  1  29    20  1 

16     40      19     35        3/49        7>5   0 

30 

om  7 

23     35 

12*23 

20    29     13  «  52  1  22     22  1  12  A 18  1 

28     46        111122      15     50      19     38 

31 

12      2 

6W17  1 

4T45  1 

] 

603  5  : 

»5      4l 

1 

[3     10  1 

. 

2x20 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1884-1885 


Jan.          Feb.       March  1    April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov.     '      I>€SC. 

0         to         t      ,      0        t      \      0        t 

0        r 

0      f 

0      / 

0      f 

0      1 

0          r 

Of                  Of 

5»30 

6T2I       o«47     C4n   5 

2A    0 

2019138 

23-52 

7/44 

22V3    0 

25  m8 

14  T  8  1  21  «  24 

!8     44 

20      2D        15         8    '       oCBlO 

15      29 

3^  2 

5^48 

19    38 

4«3i 

8k33 

28   3^  ;    6037 

[2K    8 

4«2i      29    23      21     57 

28      34 

15      9 

17     38 

1V340 

17     20 

22     II 

I3«29      21      57 

25     43 

18     26     13II31        5<J126 

II1IJII9 

27       7 

29    26 

13    52       0K27  1 

6T10 

28     30  1     702x5 

yT29 

2033     27     31      18     38 

23     47 

811158 

II  /  17 

26    16 

13     51 

20    26 

13034   '   22      18 

23    26 

16      40        IIQS2I           lnjJ33 

6=5:      2 

20    47 

23     14 

8«53 

27     30 

4«55 

28     32   ,     6<a58 

7W36 

o<2B47      25       I      14     15 

18       6 

2/36 

5V518 

21     44 

1 1 T  22 

19    31 

13015   1   21       10 

21       56 

14     50       8^30     26    43 

om.  3 

14     28 

17     31 

4M47 

25     23 

4Q   8 

27     37        4*9153 

6025 

28    45     21     46       g^   I 

"     55 

26    24 

29     54 

18       3 

9«3i 

18     41 

11^36  ;   18        8 

20     57      12A28        4nB49      21       8 

23     45 

8V327 

122:27 

1T29 

23     43 

3«B  4 

25    12  :     o==r59 

53329      25     56      17     38        3111  8 

5/35 

20    36 

25     II 

15       6 

7056 

17     14 

811526  1  13     30 

19     51        9T15   6       o=!5=i2      15       2 

17    26 

2«55 

8k   6 

28     52 

22       9 

ysi  9 

21    21  1  25     46 

3^i9      21     56      12     33  .  26     52 

29    21 

15     25 

21     13 

I2tf49 

60B18 

14    50 

3-59       711150 

17    46  :     4=5=28     24    42       8/41 

IIV322 

28       7 

4T34 

26     54 

20     22 

28    15 

16    25      19     48 

ins  9      16    43       611141      20    33 

23  32 

IIK    4 

18     10 

iiD   8 

4^19 

1111525 

28    39        I  /  41 

14      8     28    45      18    33       2V330 

5«54 

24     20 

2«     2 

25     29 

18       6 

24    21 

1011146      13     32 

26    44      1011138       0/22  1  14    37 

18     32 

7T56 

16      12 

9®52 

111541 

7-  4 

22    46      25     24 

g^   0      22     26      12     12      26     57 

IK  28 

21      54 

OD37 

24     13 

15       2 

19     35 

4/42        7ir5i6 

21       I        4/  16     24       8  !     9-37 

H     47 

6  b  16 

15     16  1     8A28 

28       7 

im55 

16    34      19     12 

21^52      16     13        6V316  ■   22     38     28     31  I 

20     58 

OflB    3    1    22       30 

10=5=56 

M      5 

28    25        rssii 

14    40  ,  28    21     18    39  '    6k  4  !  12T40      5056 

14      50 

611515 

23     30 

26      7 

10V317      13      16 

26     29      10V345        is:22      19     57  ,  27     15      21       3 

29      30 

19     40 

5^49 

8/   2 

22     II      25     29 

8/24      23     29      14     28        4T15      I2«ii        6®   8 

I3.JI54 

2^44 

17     55 

19    53 

42:11  ,     7K53 

2D     31        6  =  34      27     59  1   18     57  ,  .27     21  :  21       3 

27    57 

15     27 

29     53 

IV344 

16    20  ,  20     32 

2/352      20       I      11K54       3tf55  :  12036       5<^37 

1 1  up  34 

27     51 

11/45 

13     37 

28     44  i     3*r3o 

15     30  ,     3>^47     26     12  :  19.     3  1  27     45 

19    45 

24     45 

10  la  I 

23     37 

25     38 

11K26      16     51 

28     25  ,   17     50      10T46 

4II10  ,   120540 

3nS25 

7^31 

21    59 

5W32 

7^50 

24     30 

0  a  38 

112:36        2T  4  ,  25     32 

19       7      27     II 

16     36 

19    57 

3/52 

17     35 

20     19 

8t   2 

14     55 

25       2 

16     25       IO«2I 

35348      11A14 

29     21 

2111  5 

15   43 

29    51 

3K   8 

22       2 

29     34 

8  k  40 

25       7 

18       7      24     49 

11=- 44 

14      3 

27     39 

122:25 

16    22 

6  b  30 

14037 

22     27 

9n43 

7ns  56 

25     54 

9W43 

OT  2 

29     54 

!                     1 

Jap.     i     Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

1                  1                  ' 

i    June     1    July     j  August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

Of              0          » 

0      f 

0      » 

0      f    1    0      / 

0      f    1     0      f 

0      1 

0      f 

0      t 

0       » 

I5<35I3           7TID29 

I5np27 

3  "138 

6/47  ;  21  nil 

235:49      loT  5 

29»55 

8®45 

2115  5 

9^53 

0^24        21       27 

29     14 

16     15 

18   53     3«  3 

5K52      22     55 

13048 

22     58 

15    56  1  23       5 

15     15  !     4^57 

I2=?V40 

28    38  1    0V351      14    57 

18       6  '     6«    5 

27    58 

7«5li5 

29    39       6ni  4 

29    39  I  18      0     25     44 

10/48  ]  12    46     26    58 

OT33      19     38 

I20S23 

21     32 

13^12      18     53 

i3"K33  '     011140  1     811126 

22    48 

24     37  '     9)<io 

13     20        3035 

27         0 

511548 

26    34        I  /  31 

20     57      13       0  1  20     50       4^343 

62:32       21      38 

26     30      17     56 

11^44 

19     58 

9  "145  1  13     59 

9^53      25       5  1     3/    0  1 

16    36 

18     35  1     4T27 

io«    7       20B39 

26     27 

3^58 

22     42  1  26     17 

22     27 

7/    I  1  14     59 

28    32 

0K49      17    42 

24     13  ,  17     38 

11115  4 

17     44 

5/25       8V325 

4^42 

18    52  1  26    52 

102:36 

13     20       1  «  25 

8D47       2,^45 

25     26 

iin.15 

17     54     20     24 

16     44 

OV344  1     8V345 

22    53 

26     13      15     37 

23     44  1  17     50 

g-31 

14     27 

on  9  !    2»i6 

28     38 

12     38  1  20    41 

5>^25 

9T30  j    0D16  1     8«2B57  1     211543 

23     12 

27    20 

12      13 

M       4 

10/28 

24     39  1     2»45 

18     18 

23     14     15     17 

24     15      17     17 

6;n.3i 

9/55 

24       8 

25     52 

22     19 

62:49     15      0 

IT3I    [      7«24    ;       03529 

9^28        1=0=27 

19   26 

22     13 

5^58 

7^45 

4V311 

19      9     27     29 

15       6 

21     56     15     43 

24  24  ;  15   10 

2/  2 

4V319 

17    48 

19     46 

16       8 

1K40     10K14 

29       I 

6044  1     o«^47 

811557    28  27 

14    19 

16     15 

29    43 

2T  3 

28     10 

14     23     23     14 

13  «  12 

21     40  1  15     33 

23    2    II 11119 

26   24 

28       7 

11K49 

14     41 

losr  19 

27     17  1     6T31 

27     36 

60235  ;  29    56 

6=^39  1 23  51 

8V32I 

102:  0 

24     10 

27     44 

22     35  1  10T23  1  20       2 

120   6 

21     21   ;  I3np52 

19     50       6/6 

20     13 

21     57 

6T51 

lib  15 

5K  0  ;  23  41 

3«46 

26     36 

5SI51   j  27     22 

211138      18       9 

225    6 

4^  5 

19    57 

25     16 

17  34 

7«  12 

17     41 

1X05    2 

20       2  1  10=^^30 

15       7  ;     OV3   5 

14       3 

16    26 

3  b  28 

9045 

OT2I 

20     56  1     10  44 

25       19 

311552  ;  23    17 

27     21  '   II     58 

26       9  1  29       5 

17    25 

24     37 

13   23 

4054  i  15     52 

9«n.24 

17   22  1    511149  '    9/26    23   50 

8K24  1  12T  4 

1043 

90342 

26    42  '   19       4  .     ooB  4 

23   17 

0-34  1   18       9  !  21      23        52:45 

20    53  1  25    22 

16     18  1  24    51 

io«  21   i     3<K26  j  14     17 

6np56 

13     29  i     0/19  1     3V317      17     45 

3T36 

8»59 

lOB     I 

9A52 

24      22    j    17      56   1    28      29 

20     23 

1  26     12  1   12     22  1  15       9      29     52 

16    33 

22     53 

15    45 

24     39 

8  0  44  1     2  A  29  1  12  ,$136 

3^37    i      811143    ;    24      20   ;   27         2    !    I2K    7 

29    45 

6D59 

OA22 

9^  5 

23     26 

16    59  I  26    37 

16      38    1    21         5 

6V3I5       8^57     24    32 

I3«  II 

21     13 

14     47 

23      8 

8  3  22 

in)j20  1   1011J29 

29   28  1    3/18 

18      8  ,  20    55       7T  9 

26     49 

5®3i 

28    57 

6=5=48 

23       23 

'  24       9 

i2ia  5  1  15    24 

os:  0  ,     2K59  !  19    58 

10D39 

19    47 

1211551 

20      7 

8.a2i  j             *    7-34 

24    31  1  27   24 

II     53 

15      IC 

>       3W    I 

24     38 

3<5159 

26    29 

3"!  8 

23       5 

i 

20     44 

I 

9KJ19 

27     3^ 

[      16    20 

18      6 

15     53 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1886-1887 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      t 

0      t 

0         r 

0         r 

0         r 

0         r 

0       f 

0      t 

0      t 

0        ; 

0      f 

0      f 

I 

28ni26 

I4V5  5 

22V352 

6K45 

9T18 

26  b  51 

3®44 

27SI  9 

20—19 

2611155 

14V316 

16^30 

2 

10/48 

25     57 

4»4i 

18      47 

21      58 

ion  46 

18     28 

I2TiplO 

4"136 

10/26 

26    37 

28    25 

3 

23       I 

7«47 

16     29 

IT   0 

4  b  56 

24    59 

3A20 

26      57 

18     27 

23      30 

8a42 

10K13 

4 

5V3  6 

19    36 

28     20 

13     26 

18      12 

90222 

18     II 

11—24 

1/51 

6KJIO 

20     36 

22       I 

5 

'Z      5 

IK  26 

10K15 

26       6 

in45 

23     51 

21553 

25      29 

14     50 

18     29 

2K24 

3T55 

6 

28    59 

13     20 

22     18 

9b    0 

15     33 

8,ai9 

17    22 

9IIIIO 

27     28 

o«33 

14     12 

15     58 

7 

10  as  49 

25      19 

4T49 

22       8 

29     30 

22      42 

1^35 

22      29 

9V548 

12     27 

26      4 

28     17 

8 

22    36 

7T26 

16     50 

5030 

133^34 

615156 

15     30 

5/28 

21     54 

24     15 

8t  6 

iob54 

9 

4H25 

19     46 

29     24 

19       4 

27    42 

21         0 

29      7 

18       8 

3«5i 

6k    3 

20     20 

23     51 

10 

16     18 

2  b  21 

12«ll 

20550 

ii<a5i 

4=^53 

12111.28 

OV534 

15    41 

17     53 

2  b  48 

70  9 

II 

28     19 

15       14 

25      13 

16    46 

25    59 

18     36 

25     33 

12     48 

27    29 

29     49 

15      32 

20    45 

12 

IOT33 

28      31 

8n33 

0A52 

ions  5 

2111  9 

8/25 

24     52 

9K17 

iir53 

28      32 

4®37 

13 

23      6 

I2ni3 

22     11 

15      6 

24       9 

15     31 

21       4 

6a49 

21       7 

24      8 

11045 

18    40 

14 

6b    2 

26      21 

6®  7 

29    26 

8-  8 

28    41 

3W32 

18     41 

3T  3 

6b35 

25       II 

2A49 

15 

19    25 

10  3554 

20    22 

i3nK5i 

22       2 

11/39 

15     48 

OK  29 

15      5 

19     13 

80B47 

17       2 

16 

3ni8 

25      48 

4A54 

28     15 

5»n.46 

24     24 

27    55 

12     16 

27     16 

2n  4 

22      31 

inRl3 

17 

17    41 

10  A  55 

19     38 

12-34 

19    20 

6W56 

9«53 

24       6 

9«37 

15      7 

6<a22 

15      22 

18 

2flB3I 

26       7 

4nR28 

26     44 

2/40 

19     15 

21     45 

5T59 

22     12 

28    23 

20    19 

29      27 

19 

17    39 

linRl4 

19     19 

1 1 11140 

15     43 

I2SS22 

3>^33 

18       0 

50  2 

113553 

4nR23 

13  —  28 

20 

2A58 

26       7 

4^    I 

24     17 

28     29 

^3     19 

15     20 

Ob  12 

18      9 

25     36 

18    31 

27      23 

21 

18     14 

IO;fi:38 

18     30 

7^33 

ioV)58 

25       9 

27     10 

12     39 

I  OB  36 

9<a34 

2-44 

iiiai2 

22 

3nRi9 

24     43 

211137 

20     27 

23     12 

6K56 

9T   7 

25     25 

15       24 

23     46 

16     59 

24     53 

23 

18       4 

8ll\.2I 

16     21 

3V3    I 

5«i3 

18      46 

21       16 

8033 

29    33 

8nRii 

I  "113 

8/23 

24 

2^23 

21     33 

29     39 

15     17 

17      5 

OT43 

3W42 

22       5 

HSl  3 

22     46 

15     21 

21    40 

25 

16     19 

4/21 

12/34 

27     20 

28    54 

12     53 

16      29 

60B   5 

28     50 

7-28 

29     18 

4V343 

26 

29     42 

16    48 

25       6 

9«i3 

10K45 

25     20 

29      42 

20     29 

I3"»49 

22       8 

13/0 

17     30 

27 

12  11145 

29      0 

7W20 

21       2 

22    42 

8  b  10 

13022 

5SI16 

28     51 

611141 

26     22 

OZS    I 

28 

25      27 

IIV3   0 

19    21 

2K52 

4T52 

21     25 

27      30 

20     19 

13^49 

20     58 

9V323 

12       17 

29 

7/53 

i«i3 

14     49 

17     19 

sn  7 

I20S    4 

5nR30 

28     33 

4/54 

22       4 

24      20 

30 

20       6 

13      2 

26     56 

Ob    7 

19    14 

26      57 

20     39 

1211157 

18     26 

4«25 

6KI3 

3^ 

2KJ  9 

24    51 

13     17 

12^    2 

5=^38 

IV333 

18         I 

DM 

Jah 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0          f 

0      f 

0      f 

0      t 

0      f 

0         r 

0        t 

0      f 

0      t 

0         r 

0       t 

0      f 

I 

29X49 

14  «   3 

22  b  42 

1003  29 

17«J144 

10-54 

20111    I 

IOV354 

2735:56 

OT5O 

15  b  24 

18050 

2 

II.TP4I 

26    36 

5ni2 

23  58 

inR48 

25      22 

4/     2 

,  23     52 

10  K    2 

12      41 

27     28 

I  OB  24 

3 

23     44 

9032 

18         2 

7S150 

16     10 

9  "153 

17     53 

'     6a36 

22          I 

24     33 

9038 

14       7 

4 

6y    2 

22    54 

Iffi5l4 

22         7 

0^48 

24     20 

IV330 

19       6 

3T56 

6  b  26 

21     56 

27     I 

5 

18     40 

6^43 

14     53 

6nfi46 

15     39 

8/38 

14     51 

IK  23 

15     47 

18     22 

40B24 

10^  8 

6 

in4i 

20     58 

28     58 

21     44 

011134 

22     40 

27     55 

13     30 

27     38 

0023 

17       4 

23     27 

7 

15       6 

5<J135 

13  A  30 

6=^54 

15     25 

6V322 

10SS40 

25     29 

9«3i 

12     33 

29     58 

7rr    2 

8 

28     56 

20     29 

28     23 

22       6 

0/    4 

19   41 

23       8 

7T22 

21     29 

24     54 

13^11 

20     53 

9 

I3«B  6 

5nP32 

i3nR33 

7n  9 

14     23 

2«37 

5K22 

19     13 

3037 

70529 

26     46 

5===   I 

10 

27     33 

20    35 

28     48 

21     55 

28     16 

15     II 

17      23 

'«    5 

15     58 

20     24 

ion543 

19     25 

11 

I2^IO 

5-29 

.14:5=  0 

6/16 

11V341 

27     27 

29      18 

13       4 

28     37 

3A42 

25       5 

4"l  I 

12 

26    51 

20       8 

28     58 

20      9 

24     40 

9K30 

IIT  9 

25     13 

HOB  38 

17     25 

9-49 

18     46 

13 

ilnR28 

411127 

I3m35 

3V332 

7ai5 

21     24 

23       2 

7038 

25       4 

111536 

24     50 

3/30 

14 

25     57 

18     24 

27     46 

16     27 

19     30 

3T14 

5«    I 

20     22 

8A58 

16     14 

9^59 

18       7 

15 

IOrJvl4 

1/58 

11/29 

28     58 

1K31 

15       6 

17     12 

30s  28 

23     18 

1-15 

25       6 

2V328 

16 

24         18 

15     10 

24     45 

iiaii 

13     23 

27      4 

29     38 

16     59 

8nR   3 

16     30 

10/    I 

16     29 

17 

Sin  7 

28       4 

7V336 

23     10 

25     II 

9«i3 

12022 

0JI54 

23       5 

I  "149 

24     34 

OSS  5 

18 

21       41 

10V340 

20       6 

5^   I 

7T  0 

21     35 

25     27 

15     II 

8-17 

17       I 

8V340 

13     16 

19 

5/    ' 

23       3 

2«20 

16    48 

18     55 

4ni3 

80B52 

29     47 

23     27 

1/56 

22     17 

26      3 

20 

18       8 

5«M 

14      22 

28    35 

Ob  58 

17      8 

22     37 

i4nE35 

811127 

16     25 

555:26 

8K30 

21 

IV5   I 

17     17 

26      15 

10T26 

13     13 

00S19 

6.^39 

29     27 

23       8 

0V325 

18       9 

20    40 

22 

13     42 

29     13 

8k   4 

22     22 

25    40 

13     45 

20     54 

14-17 

7/25 

13    55 

0K31 

2T39 

23 

26     10 

UK   4 

19     52 

4  b  27 

8019 

27     24 

5^17 

28     56 

4V340 

26     57 

12     37 

14     31 

24 

8w26 

22     52 

1T40 

16     41 

21     11 

11JI13 

19     43 

13  "121 

17     40 

9^36 

24     33 

26     23 

25 

20     32 

4T40 

13     31 

29       4 

40B15 

25     10 

4-  9 

27     27 

o«:2i 

21     55 

6T24 

8bi7 

26 

2M29 

16     30 

25     27 

11038 

17     31 

9npi3 

18     30 

11/ 13 

12     45 

4K    I 

18     15 

20     19 

27 

14      20 

28     25 

7  b  29 

24     23 

o«Jl57 

23      21 

2  "143 

24     39 

24     57 

15     58 

Ob    7 

2D31 

28 

26         7 

IOb28 

19    39 

70220 

14     34 

7-31 

16    46 

7>347 

7X  0 

27     50 

12       6 

14     .55 

29 

7T55 

2n  0 

20     32 

28     22 

21     43 

0/38 

20     39 

18    57 

9T40 

24     12 

27     33 

30 

19    47 

14     33 

3^59 

1211522 

5  "154 

14     17 

3«i6 

21     32 

6026 

100B24 

31 

i«48 

27    22 

26    33 

27     42 

15     41 

3  b  26 

23     29 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF    THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1888-1889 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec 

0      t 

0      f 

0       t 

0      t 

0      1 

0      1 

0      / 

0      1 

0      f 

0      1 

0      # 

0          r 

I 

6^47 

2811P13 

22-35 

16/    5 

23VJ14 

10K56 

13T46 

27«35 

110244 

I5«JI  5 

4=^34 

1211127 

2 

20     i6 

12=2=32 

77ai8 

OV3IO 

6*34 

23     16 

25     45 

9031 

24     17 

28    27 

19     19 

27     39 

3 

3n556 

26    51 

21      48 

13     49 

19     29 

5T23 

7»38 

21     34 

7SI12 

121916 

4"123 

12/57 

4 

17     46 

urn  6 

6/    2 

27       4 

2K    4 

17     20 

19    31 

3®49 

20    29 

26    33 

19     39 

28       9 

5 

1-44 

25    14 

19    58 

9«59 

14      23 

29     13 

1025 

16     18 

4nB  8 

II:i2:II 

4/54 

13  W    6 

6 

15,    50 

9/13 

3V336 

22     37 

2        30 

lib   4 

13     26 

29      3 

18       9 

26      5 

19    57 

27     40 

7 

0,111  2 

23      3 

16    57 

5>^   2 

8T29 

22    57 

25     34 

I2A    6 

2tJi:27 

iim.  5 

4V542 

Iias47 

8 

14     18 

6V)42 

OSS    2 

17     16 

20      24 

4n53 

7®54 

25     26 

16        56 

26     0 

19       I 

25     26 

9 

28    35 

20       8 

12     53 

29     23 

2  b  16 

16    54 

20    24 

9W  2 

111129 

10/44 

2«55 

8x39 

10 

12/49 

3«23 

25     33 

11T24 

14       8 

29      2 

3A  8 

22     52 

16             I 

25    10 

16    23 

21      29 

II 

26    59 

16     24 

8k   I 

23     20 

26         I 

IIflBl8 

16      5 

6^52 

0/25 

9V316 

29    29 

3T59 

12 

IOV353 

29     II 

20    21 

5«M 

7056 

23     44 

29     16 

21       0 

14    39 

23     2 

12K16 

16     14 

13 

24    33 

11)^45 

2T31 

17      5 

19    55 

6A2I 

I2ns40 

5  "1^3 

28    41 

6«28 

24    47 

28     18 

14 

7«56 

24       6 

14     35 

28    57 

I  ©59 

19     12 

26     17 

19    27 

12V329 

19    36 

7T  6 

10  b  14 

15 

21       0 

6T16 

26    32 

ion5i 

14     13 

2116 18 

10^   8 

3/40 

26      5 

2K30 

19     16 

22        6 

16 

3H45 

18     17 

8«25 

22    50 

26    37 

15      42 

24      12 

17    49 

9«28 

15      12 

I  big 

3056 

17 

16     12 

o«ii 

20     16 

42=57 

9.ai7 

29      26 

8ni26 

IV553 

22    40 

27    43 

13     16 

15     47 

18 

28     24 

12      3 

2n  9 

17    17 

22     15 

13=^31 

22     48 

15     49 

5M40 

lor  5 

25      9 

27     40 

19 

ior25 

23    57 

14      7 

29    55 

5^37 

27     54 

7/15 

29     36 

18     29 

22    18 

yn  0 

90038 

20 

22   20 

5n57 

26    14 

I2J154 

19    23 

I2ni34 

21     44 

I3si;i2 

IT  7 

4«23 

18    50 

21     42 

21 

4«I2 

18      8 

8QB36 

26    20 

3=2=37 

27    25 

6W   7 

26    35 

13     32 

16    22 

00241 

3A54 

22 

16      7 

050  34 

21      18 

1011S15 

18     15 

12/20 

20     21 

9^43 

25    47 

28     15 

12    36 

16     16 

23 

28      9 

13     21 

4A24 

24    40 

311114 

27      9 

4»22 

22     35 

7«52 

ion  5 

24    37 

28     52 

24 

101122 

26    31 

17    57 

9'^3' 

18    26 

11V346 

18         4 

5TI2 

19    49 

21    54 

6A50 

ii'9e43 

25 

22    51 

loA  5 

ins  58 

24    42 

3/40 

26      4 

IK  27 

17    34 

1040 

3®45 

19    17 

24     52 

26 

5®37 

24       4 

16     28 

lom  2 

18    45 

9«58 

14     29 

29     44 

13    30 

15    44 

215  3 

8=2:23 

27 

18    42 

811824 

I:ii:20 

25      21 

3>333 

23     27 

27      12 

lib  43 

25     23 

27    54 

15     13 

22        16 

28 

2SL    7 

23       I 

16        27 

10/27 

17     56 

6K32 

9T37 

23     37 

73823 

I0,J122 

28    50 

6WI32 

29 

15    49 

7^47 

I  "139 

25    10 

i«5i 

19     14 

21     48 

5029 

19    37 

23       13 

12^56 

21          8 

30 

29    47 

16     45 

9VJ27 

15     18 

IT37 

3b48 

17     24 

2JIIO 

6nR30 

27    30 

6/    0 

31 

13^56 

1/36 

28     ;8 

15     42 

29     27 

20     17 

21          I 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov 

I>cc 

0      t 

0      f 

0      t 

0      / 

0      t 

0      t 

0      1 

0      / 

0      / 

0      t 

0      f 

0        t 

I 

6KS   3 

27«33 

5>(53 

23r52 

27  b    2 

IIflBI5 

14A   6 

1-18 

22111  8 

IV5   5 

24a  3 

IT33 

2 

20     55 

IIK20 

19    25 

6  b  20 

8n59 

23      4 

26     18 

14    25 

6/   3 

15     " 

7>(45 

14     36 

3 

5«32 

24    44 

2T39 

18     35 

20    49 

4^59 

8nji42 

27    48 

20      7 

29     16 

21     16 

27     24 

4 

19     46 

7T46 

^5     36 

0038 

20236 

17       3 

21     22 

I1 11128 

4V320 

I3«I9 

4T36 

9tf59 

5 

3>^35 

20    26 

28     14 

12      J2 

14    23 

29     21 

4-21 

25     25 

18    39 

27     18 

17     44 

22     21 

6 

16     57 

2«47 

iob35 

24      21 

26    16 

iinR57 

17     41 

9/39 

3«  3 

11K12 

Ob  39 

4033 

7 

29     55 

14     53 

22     41 

6gB  9 

8A18 

24     55 

111124 

24       8 

17     27 

24    57 

13     20 

i6     37 

8 

I2T30 

26    48 

4037 

i8       2 

20    35 

8:Srl9 

15     31 

8V549 

IK47 

8T29 

25     48 

28     32 

9 

24     47 

8n38 

16     27 

OSI  5 

3nRi2 

22       10 

0/    0 

23     37 

15     57 

21     46 

8n  3 

IOS23 

10 

6«5i 

20     28 

28     16 

12     24 

16     13 

6ni29 

14     49 

8*25 

29    51 

4  b  46 

20      6 

22       10 

II 

18     45 

2flB22 

lOQBIO 

25       3 

29     43 

21      T2 

29     50 

23       6 

13T26 

17    29 

202   I 

3^58 

12 

0035 

14      25 

22       14 

8nj   7 

13^41 

6/14 

14V357 

7>^33 

26    39 

29    53 

13    49 

15       48 

13 

12     25 

26      40 

4.JI33 

21     37 

28       6 

21     26 

oar  0 

21     39 

9«29 

i2n   3 

25     36 

27       46 

14 

24     17 

9.JIIO 

17       II 

5=^33 

I2ni54 

6V338 

14     50 

5T22 

21     59 

24      0 

7A25 

9^55 

^5 

6flBi6 

21      56 

onsio 

19     52 

27    55 

21     42 

29     22 

18     39 

4011 

50B50 

^9    23 

22     20 

16 

18     23 

4nB59 

13     31 

4^29 

13/2 

6»28 

13^29 

I  W31 

16     10 

17    38 

in»34 

5^  6 

17 

0A40 

18     18 

27     14 

19     16 

28      5 

20     51 

27       9 

14       I 

28       0 

29    28 

14       3 

18     15 

18 

13      8 

1^51 

11-14 

4/    4 

I2KJ55 

4K49 

IOT22 

26     12 

90B48 

ii<a27 

26     54 

ini52 

19 

25     49 

15     36 

25     27 

18     46 

27    27 

18     22 

23       II 

8nii 

21     39 

23   40 

lOrSrll 

15     56 

20 

811R43 

29     30 

911148 

3W16 

ii«36 

1T30 

5«39 

20     I 

3^38 

6TTR11 

23     55 

0/26 

21 

21     51 

13  "131 

24     II 

17     31 

25     24 

14     16 

17     50 

10049 

15     49 

19     4 

8111  4 

15     17 

22 

5-'o 

27     36 

8/30 

i«30 

8K50 

26     44 

29     49 

13    38 

28     15 

2^20 

22     35 

0KJ23 

23 

18  48 

11/44 

22     44 

15     12 

21     56 

8  b  58 

iin40 

25     33 

iinjl  0 

15    58 

7/21 

15     35 

24 

2ni38 

25     53 

6V350 

28     39 

4^45 

21       0 

23     27 

7<yi38 

24       4 

29   57 

22     15 

OSS  42 

25 

16    42 

IOV5   2 

20     47 

11x52 

17     19 

2054 

50215 

19    55 

7:0:26 

1411112 

7KJ  8 

15     37 

26 

0/58 

24       9 

4^35 

M    52 

29    40 

14     44 

17       5 

2rTK25 

21        3 

28   37 

21     54 

OKII 

^Z 

15     25 

8ssi2 

18     14 

7T40 

II  «52 

26     31 

29       2 

15     10 

411152 

13  Z'   6 

6a26 

14      22 

28 

29    58 

22         8 

1K45 

20     16 

23     54 

85B19 

ii«a  7 

28       9 

18        50 

27   33 

20      41 

28        7 

29 

I4V333 

'§       5 

2«42 

5050 

20       9 

23    22 

II:Gr22 

2/53 

IIW53 

4>^37 

IIT27 

30 

29       5 

28     13 

14    57 

17     41 

2Sl    4 

5^548 

24        46 

16     59 

26       7 

18     14 

24      24 

31 

13^27 

II  TIC 

29     28 

18    26 

8ni22 

lOSSIO 

7«    2 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1890-1891 


DM 

Jan.     1 

r 

Feb.    ! 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      f 

0     # 

0         r 

0         r 

0         r 

0      » 

0      » 

0         r 

0         r 

0      # 

0      » 

0      t 

I 

I9«24 

4QB12 

I2flB39 

16^27 

29npi8 

17 11121 

24/13 

17x51 

urn 

17  b  21 

30B56 

esi  I 

2 

in33 

15    59 

24    26 

8nB42 

12^14 

1/28 

9V5  6 

3X   4 

25    28 

0041 

16     II 

17   56 

3 

13     32 

27     47 

6AI7 

21      II 

25     29 

15     53 

24     10 

18      4 

9  b  15 

13    35     28     14 

29   48 

4 

25     26 

9<a40 

18    14 

3^57 

9m  4 

oV)3i 

9x16 

2T40 

22    32 

26      6      lost  8 

II11J14I 

5 

7flBi6 

21     38 

onjj22 

16     58 

22     55 

15     15 

24     15 

16    50  '     5023 

80819  i  22       0 

23  40 

6 

19      4  . 

3nR44 

12      40 

011114 

7/    0     29     59  , 

8K59' 

Ob  30     17    51 

20    20  j     3"B53 

5-49 

7 

0A52 

15     59 

25   II 

13     43 

21     13 

I4«36 

23     23 

13     43 

00s  2 

2,JII2 

15    53 

18    13 

8 

12    43 

28     24 

7^53 

27     21 

5V53I 

29      2 

7T22 

26    32 

12       I 

14      2 

28      3 

011156 

9 

24    39 

IltGr    0 

20     47 

II  /    9 

19     50 

13J<I3 

20   58 

8059 

23    52 

25    54 

IOtfi:27 

J4       0 

10 

6I1J142 

23       48 

3^152 

25       3 

4«   7 

27      7 

4  bio 

21     12 

5«a4i 

7"J152 

23       6 

27     25 

11 

18     55 

6ni52 

17       9 

.    9V5  3 

i8     19      10T44 

17       2 

3®I2 

17   31 

19    58 

6v\  2 

II  /12 

12 

I:Gr22 

20    12 

0/37 

23       8 

2K25 

24      4 

29     36 

15      6 

29  24 

2^15 

19     15 

25     19 

«3 

14           4 

3/51 

14     17 

7SK18 

16      23 

7b    8 

11056 

26    56 

iinR24 

14    44 

2/43 

9V540 

'4 

27       6 

17    51 

28     10 

21     30 

OTI2 

19    57 

24      5 

8A45 

23     31 

27    25 

16    24 

24     10 

^5 

IOII13I 

2V3II 

I2V5I6 

5><43 

13     49 

2032 

608  6 

20    36 

5^47 

ionii8 

0W17 

8«44 

16 

24      21 

16     50 

26    36 

19    53 

27     15  1  14     56 

18       I 

2np29 

18     11 

23    22 

14     17 

23     16 

17 

8/37 

i«44 

iias  6 

3T56 

10  «  26  1  27       8 

29     52 

14     27 

S  0^45 

6/38 

28    23 

7x40 

18 

23      17 

16    45 

25    42 

17    48 

23     22 

90812 

11A42 

26     31 

13     30 

20      4 

I2«33 

21     54 

^9 

8V3i6 

1x44 

10K19 

lb  24 

6n  4 

21         9 

23     32 

8^43 

26    27 

3W42 

26    45 

5T54 

20 

23     27 

16    33 

24     49 

14    43 

18    30 

3Sl  0 

5nR24 

21         4 

9/38 

17    31 

IOK55 

19    40 

21 

8«4i 

IT  3 

9T  6 

27    41 

03D44 

14     50 

17     22 

311138 

23       6 

x«33 

25      3 

3  b  12 

22 

23     48 

15       8 

23       3 

ion  20 

12     47 

26    40 

29     27 

16      27 

6V)52 

15    45 

QT  5 

16    30 

23 

8K38 

28     44 

6b36 

22    41 

24     41 

8nR35 

"^43 

29    35 

20    58 

OK    7 

23      0 

29    35 

24 

23       3 

II«52 

19     44 

4®47 

6A31 

20     39 

24     14 

13/    5 

5«24 

M    35 

6b44 

12II27 

25 

7T   I 

24     34 

2028 

16    43 

18     22 

2^55 

7m  4 

26    58 

20      5 

29      4 

20     16 

25       7 

26 

20     30 

6n54 

14     52 

28     34 

011R17 

15     29 

20     16 

11V317 

4x58 

13T28 

3032 

70B36 

27 

3«32 

18    59 

26    58 

10  A  24 

12     21 

28     23 

3/54= 

25     59 

19    54 

27    41 

16    32 

19    54 

28 

j6      9 

05052 

8®53 

22     19 

24     40  1  1111142 

17     59 

lis;   I 

4T44 

lib  38 

29     16 

2Sl    2 

29 

28    27 

20    42 

4^23 

7^16  1  25     27 

2V530 

26     13 

19     19 

25     15 

110844 

14        2 

30 

10031 

2,a3i 

16    42 

20     14  i     9/38 

17     24 

11x25 

3«33 

8030 

23     58 

25    57 

31 

22    24 

14   25 

3^36 

2W34 

26    28 

21     23 

7^848 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

0      t 

Sept. 

Oct.        Nov. 

Dec. 

0      t 

0      1 

0      t 

0      « 

0      f 

0      t 

0         r 

0      f 

Of              0          » 

0      t 

I 

i9nR4l 

411125 

i3»n.29 

1V350 

98:48 

3T26 

12  b    8 

i®53 

iSsi2S 

211517       5"146 

9/10 

2 

1^37 

16    57 

26      0 

15    23 

23    57 

17    39 

25    43 

14    32 

0111226 

3^  8     17     55 

21     58 

3 

13     43 

29    50 

8/50 

29     18 

8x20 

lb  47 

90  6 

27      I 

12      22 

14     59       0  /  12 

5W   I 

4 

26       3 

13/9 

22         I 

i3«36 

22    51 

15    46 

22     17 

9<J120 

24      15 

26    53      12    40 

18     17 

5 

8!ii4i 

26    56 

5V338 

28     14 

7T27 

29    35 

508I5 

21       31    '      6-5 

8ni5i     25    20 

1x46 

6 

21     42 

11V313 

19     43 

13  K   8 

22     3  !  i3n  9 

18       I 

3nP34  1  17     55 

20    55       8V5I3 

15    26 

7 

5/    9 

25    57 

4ai6 

28     10 

6  b  30     26     28 

OA34 

15     30  ,  29    47 

3/    8     21     22 

29    18 

8 

19       2 

iix  3 

19     12 

13T11 

20    44  1     9<2S30 

12     55 

27     22  1  II 11145 

15     34       ^«49 

13K19 

9 

3V522 

26     21 

4K26 

28       I 

4040  1  22     15 

25       4 

9-11 

23      52 

28     16      18     34 

27    28 

10 

18       3 

1  IIK39 

19     45 

I2b32 

18     15  1     4JI43 

7^  5 

21       3 

6/13 

11V317  1     2K37 

11T43 

II 

2*59 

26    48 

i     4T59 

26      39 

10B27 

16    58 

19      0 

3"l  0 

18    53 

24    42  1  16    58 

26      2 

12 

18       2 

1  11T36 

19    57 

ion  19 

14     17 

29       I 

0=5=51 

15       7 

1W56 

8x32        1T34 

IOb22 

13 

3><    I 

25     58 

4«3i 

23    32 

26    48 

1011558 

12     44 

27     30 

15     27 

22    48  ;  16    20 

24     39 

14 

17    48 

9«5i 

18     35 

6<2S2I 

9Sl   3 

22     51 

24     44 

10/13 

29    28 

7  X  29      I  b  9 

8049 

»5 

2T17 

23     17 

2  mo 

18      49 

21       6 

4^46 

611154 

23     22 

i3«57 

22    28     15    54 

22    48 

16 

16     24 

6ni8 

15    17 

IJl     I 

3"K  2 

16    46 

19    20 

6V359 

28    52 

7T37       0029 

60B32 

17 

o«   8 

18  58 

28     0 

13         I 

14     55 

28     58 

2/    6 

21       6 

H^   5 

22     48  1  14     46 

19    57 

18 

13     31 

I       10821 

100223 

24     55 

26    50 

1 1 11124 

15     17 

5«40 

29    25 

7  b  50     28     41 

3A   3 

19 

26     34 

,  X3     32 

22    32 

6nji47 

8-50  ;  24    9 

28     53 

20     36 

14T41 

22     35      120B11 

15    48 

20 

911 20 

'  25     35 

[   4A31 

18     40 

21     0  '   7/13 

I2V355 

1     5^45 

29    42 

6055     25     18 

1  28     15 

21 

21     53 

1     7^32 

1  16    25 

0-38 

311122 1 20  39 

27     19 

1  20     57 

14  b  21 

20     48       8A   2 

1  1011J126 

22 

4®i5 

1  19     26 

1  28    16 

12     42 

15  57 ,  4V324 

I2X    0 

j     6T   2 

28    33 

40B14     20     26 

;  22     25 

23 

16     28 

;     I  "519 

[  lonjj  8 

24     56 

28  49  1  18  26 

26       51 

20     49 

12II17 

17     14 

1     2nK35 

4-17 

24 

28     34 

;  13  12 

1  22       3 

7"li9 

11/55  ,   2*42 

IIM42 

5«i5 

25     34 

29     53 

M    33 

16      7 

25 

10  .$135 

1  25       6 

1     4^   I 

19     53 

25     17      17       6 

26       26 

19     15 

80828 

12JI13 

26    25 

28      0 

26 

22     31 

7^  2 

16       5 

2/39 

8V553  1     1K32 

IOT57 

2051      21       3 

24     19 

8.5.15 

loni  I 

27 

411R24 

1  ^9       3 

28     10 

15     37 

22     41 

15    57 

25     10 

16        4    1      3,0.22 

6nRi7 

20      8 

22     14 

28 

16     16 

'     11n.11 

1011134 

28     49 

6«39 

0T15 

9b    4 

28    59  i  15    30 

18       9 

2111  7 

4/43 

29 

28       8 

23       2 

12V314 

20     45 

14     24 

22     40 

II0837  1  27     30 

29     59 

14     16 

17    31 

30 

10^   5 

5/43 

25     53 

4K56 

28     22 

5059 

24       2        9"B25 

11-^50      26     36 

OV339 

31 

22       9 

1 

1  18     i7 

1  19     II 

i  19     3 

6,ai8 

23     46 

) 

1 

1  14       6 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLAGE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1 892-1893 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

I>ec 

0      t 

0      f 

0      t 

°  .    ' 

0      f 

0      t 

0      « 

0      t 

0      1 

0      t 

0      f 

0           r 

I 

27V350 

20  X  12 

14T15 

7n  9 

i3®40 

ins  3 

3-32 

17111  0 

IV320 

5«i7 

25K23 

3W20 

2 

"«47 

4T48 

29       4 

21       II 

27       I 

13     22 

15     27 

28    55 

14       4 

18    50 

lOT  5      18     19 

3 

25    54 

19    14 

i3«36 

40048 

9A58 

25     26 

27     16 

II  /   2 

27     13 

2K50 

25      6       3  n  27 

4 

10  M   6 

3«28 

27     47 

18         2 

22     34 

7  —  21 

9"!  5 

23     24 

10x48 

17    17 

iobi8      18     33 

5 

24     18 

17     28 

iin37 

OSI55 

4»»B52 

19     10 

21       0 

6V3   6 

24     48 

2T  5 

25     32  I      3®29 

6 

8T29 

in  14 

25      7 

13      29 

16     56 

011158 

3/    4 

19     10 

9K    9 

17      6 

ion  39  1   18       6 

7 

22     36 

14    46 

8aDi8 

25      50 

28     52 

12     50 

15     21 

2x36 

23     46 

2  b  13 

25     28  1      2^17 

8 

6«38 

28     7 

21     13 

7n»59 

10—42 

24     48 

27     54 

16     22 

8T32 

17      15 

90055  1   16       0 

9 

20     34 

II<ZBl6 

3«J155 

19     59 

22     30 

6/56 

IOV344 

OK  25 

23     18 

2n  5 

23     55  ;  29     14 

10 

4n23 

24   14 

16    25 

1-54 

4"li9 

19     16 

23     52 

14     39 

7«58 

16    38 

7.a28 

1    I215    2 

II 

18       5 

7^   2 

28    45 

13     44 

16     12 

IV349 

7x16 

29       0 

22    27 

00048 

20    35 

24       27 

12 

15038 

19     38 

ionR56 

25     33 

28     10 

14     36 

20     54 

13T22 

6n42 

14    36 

3»»Ri8 

6—25 

13 

15       0 

2nB   4 

22     59 

7^22 

10/17 

27     36 

4K42 

27    41 

20    41 

28     I 

15     43 

18      31 

14 

28       8 

14     18 

4=^55 

19     13 

22     23 

10x50 

18     39 

lib  54 

40024 

iiA  6 

27    52 

OIIII9 

15 

iiSl   2 

26      22 

16     47 

I  /  10 

5V5    I 

24     17 

2T41 

26      0 

17  51 

23     52 

9-51   '  12       5 

16 

23     41 

8:GrI7 

28     35 

13     14 

17     42 

7K56 

16    47 

9058 

iSi  4 

6nR23 

21     42      23     52 

17 

6nji   4 

20      7 

1071123 

25     29 

0x38 

21     48 

Ob  54 

23     47 

14       3 

18     41 

3"130       5/45 

18 

18     14 

I  "154 

22     14 

7V358 

13     52 

5T51 

15       3 

70028 

26    49 

0-49 

15     16      17     44 

19 

0=!5rI3 

13     44 

4/12 

20    46 

27     24 

20       4 

29     12 

20     58 

9njl23 

12     48 

27      5      29     53 

20 

12         4 

25     42 

16     21 

3«56 

11K15 

4«27 

i3ni8 

4<ai8 

21     45 

24     41  ^ 

8/57      I2V3I3 

21 

23     53 

7/52 

28     48 

17     30 

25     26 

18    55 

27      21 

17  25 

3^56 

611130 

20    54      24     43 

22 

5  "144 

20     21 

11V336 

IK  30 

9r55 

3026 

IIOOI5 

onjii8 

15    57 

18     17 

3K>  0  1     7sr25 

23 

17     44 

3V313 

24     49 

15     55 

24     38 

17    53 

24     59 

12     57 

27    51 

0/    4 

15     14  1  20     18 

24 

29    57 

16     32 

8x31 

0T42 

9  b  30 

20012 

8JI28 

25     21 

9  "139 

II     54 

27     40 

3^24 

25 

12/28 

0x20 

22     42 

15    45 

24     24 

16      17 

21     40 

7-31 

21     25 

23     50 

10x21 

16      43 

26 

25     22 

14     36 

7K20 

o«55 

9ni2 

OSI  3 

4nR33 

19     30 

3/12 

5-^56 

23     18 

OTX7 

27 

8V341 

29     16 

22      19 

16      3 

23     47 

13  27 

17       7 

iia2i 

15      6 

18     16 

6k  34 

H       7 

28 

22     25 

14K12 

7T3I 

m  0 

80B  3 

26  28 

29     24 

13     9 

27     10 

0x54 

20     12 

28     13 

29 

6«32 

29     15 

22    45 

15    38 

21     55 

9W  7 

11  —  28 

24    57 

9V33I 

13     52 

4T12 

i2«34 

30 

20    57 

7«5i 

29    52 

5^22 

21     27 

23     22 

6/51 

22     12 

27     16 

18     36 

27     10 

31 

5>^32 

22     41 

18     24 

511110 

18    57 

IIK    6 

"n55 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

■ 

E>ec. 

0         ; 

0      t 

0      / 

0      f 

0      f 

0      t 

0         ; 

0      1 

0      / 

0      / 

0      f 

0          r 

I 

26043 

iSsi  9 

26,1156 

14-13 

17  Ta  3 

1V528 

4x56 

22K56 

I4«i4 

23n27 

i6<a24 

23^   9 

2 

II35  26 

11544 

lonp   8 

26     25 

28    54 

13    28 

17      23 

6T14 

28     18 

70041 

29    55       5^56 

3 

25    57 

14     57 

23       5 

8ni27 

10/44 

25     34 

OK    I 

19     43 

12027 

21     47 

I3"P  9      18     25 

4 

io<a  7 

27    47 

5^44 

20    22 

22    34 

7x50 

12      51 

3  b  26 

26     39 

5<J143 

26       7       0 111.42 

5 

23    52 

10^17 

18       8 

2/13 

4^3  28 

20     18 

25    55 

17     22 

100054 

19     28 

8-51      12     49 

6 

7nRii 

22     30 

011117 

14      2 

16    29 

3K    I 

9T16 

I II 33 

25      7 

3nB  I 

21     22      24     50 

7 

20     4 

4"129 

12     16 

25     54 

28     39 

16       2 

22    56 

15     55 

9Sii5 

16    20 

3  "143 

6/46 

8 

2^33 

16     19 

24      7 

7V352 

IIX    4 

29     24 

6«56 

00028 

23     14 

29    26 

15     54 

18     39 

9 

14    44 

28       7 

5^56 

20      3 

23     47 

13T10 

21     17 

15       5 

7"R   I 

12—18 

27    58 

OV330 

10 

26    41 

9/58 

17     47 

2x30 

6  k  52 

27     21 

5057 

29    40 

20     31 

24     55 

9/56 

12      22 

11 

8T1130 

21     57 

29     47 

15     16 

20     21 

"«57 

20     50 

i4ca  6 

3=^43 

7ia2o 

21     49 

24      15 

12 

20    16 

4V3  9 

11V358 

28    27 

4^17 

26    52 

5®  50 

28    17 

16     36 

19    32 

3V339 

6xsi2 

13 

2/    6 

16     36 

24     27 

I2K    3 

18     39 

120   I 

20    48 

i2nR  8 

29     II 

1/35 

15     30 

18      15 

M 

14       2 

29     22 

7x17 

26        5 

3tf24 

27     15 

5«a33 

25     34 

iii»l3o 

13    30 

27     25 

OK  28 

15 

26       9 

I2s;28 

20     29 

IOT30 

18     27 

120022 

19     59 

8=^37 

23     35 

25    21 

9x27 

12      54 

16 

8V330 

25     51 

4K    5 

25      13 

3040 

27     13 

3nR59 

21      17 

5/32 

7V313 

21     41 

25      38 

17 

21       5  j 

9H31 

18         2 

10  «    9 

18     51 

1 1  .$140 

17     31 

3  "137 

17     24 

19     9 

4K11 

8T45 

18 

3«54 

23     23 

2TI6 

25       8 

30052 

25     39 

0=^35 

15     43 

29     16 

iai3 

17       2 

22      18 

19 

16    57  1 

7T25 

16     44 

ion  2 

18     34 

9W  8 

13     15 

27     39 

11W14 

13     32 

0T19 

6w  19 

20 

OK13  ' 

21     31 

i«i7 

24     45 

2,J152 

22     10 

25     35 

9^30 

23     21 

26      8 

14       2 

20     50 

21 

13     39 

5«39 

15     52 

90211 

16      43 

4=^48 

7  "139 

21     22 

5«=42 

9K   6 

28     14 

5n46 

22 

27     15 

19     48 

0022 

23    16 

ons    7 

17       6 

19     34 

3V319 

18     19 

22     28 

I2b53 

21          0 

513 

10T58 

3056 

14     44 

7^  0 

13       6 

29     10 

1/23 

15     25 

IK  16 

6T14 

27    52 

63523 

M 

24     50 

18       I 

28     54 

20     22 

25     44 

II  m  4 

13     13 

27     43 

14     33 

20     24 

1311  3 

21       42 

25 

8«5o 

2QB    2 

122052 

3"525 

8^   5 

22    54 

25       7 

10x15 

28       9 

4»53 

28     16 

6^46 

26 

22     57 

15     59 

26     35 

16     10 

20     13 

4/42 

7V3   8 

23       2 

12T  2 

19     37 

130021 

21       26 

27 

7nii 

29      48 

loSi   6 

28     41 

2niii 

16   33 

19     18 

6K    4 

26       8 

4027 

28      9 

5"J!37 

28 

21     30  1 

13^28 

23     22 

10-59 

14      4 

28    28 

i«39 

19     20 

10  b  24 

19     15 

I2A33 

19     17 

29 

5®5i  ' 

6np24 

23      8 

25     54 

10V329 

14     12 

2T49 

24     46 

30056 

2t      31 

2  —  29 

30 

20      8  1 

19     13 

5m  8 

7/43 

22    38 

26    55 

16     29 

9n  8 

18     23      lonp  2  1 

15     16 

31 

4<ai6 

1^49 

19     34 

9K50 

Ob  17 

2A33 

1 

27     42 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1894-1895 


Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0       1 

0      1 

0      t 

0      1 

0      / 

0        r 

0      1 

0      / 

0      t 

0      / 

0      1 

0      / 

9^53 

24/17 

2V330 

i6a:22 

19x11 

7»27 

14051 

8A56 

1^34 

711111 

23/35 

25>55i 

21     54 

6V3   8  1 

14     22 

28     42 

2TIO 

21     46 

29    57 

24      5 

T5     37 

20    22 

5V550 

7«43 

3/48 

18       2 

26     19 

11K17 

15     33 

61129 

1533 14 

81556 

29     14 

3/13 

17    52 

19    32 

15     39  ' 

oar  3 

8«24 

24     II 

29     19 

21     28 

0A30 

23     24 

1211126 

15     44 

29    46 

IX2I 

27     29  1 

12     10 

20     39 

7T23 

I3tf27 

63334 

15    36 

7-25 

25     14 

27     59 

11X37 

13     17 

9V322 

24     26 

l^  7 

20     53 

27     53 

21     37 

011J121 

20    58 

7/43 

ioV3    I 

23     29 

25     24 

21      17 

6x51 

15    48 

4«39 

12D31 

6A27 

14     42 

4"l  5 

19    56 

21     56 

5K28 

7T48 

3W16 

19     26 

28    42 

18     39 

27     14 

20     59 

28     34 

i6    49 

IV357 

3^48 

17    38 

20    34 

15     20 

2TII 

IIT49 

2049 

1133  54 

5ns  8 

12—  0 

29     14 

13    52 

15     41 

or  5 

3  a  46 

27     31 

15       8 

25       9 

17      4 

26    26 

18     54 

25      3 

II  /26 

25     44 

27     41 

12    51 

17    26 

9K5I 

28     20 

8tt4i 

13322 

10  A  44 

2-17 

7^45 

23     27 

7«37 

9><5i 

26     0 

in34 

.      22      21 

ii«46 

22     25 

X5     38 

24     46 

15     21 

20     II 

5V322 

19     34 

22     13 

9  a  31 

16     5 

5T   6 

25     31 

6ni9 

29      50 

8nR32 

28       8 

2/25 

17     14 

IK39 

4T51 

23    24 

03352 

18       9 

9033 

20     22 

I3A56 

22       2 

10  in.42 

14     30 

29      7 

13     52 

17     46 

7034 

15    48 

I  a  33 

23     54 

45B34 

27    53 

5^17 

23       4 

26     29 

IISK     I 

26     16 

o«58 

21     56 

o<a43 

15     22 

8flB29    , 

18     52 

iinjl40 

18     18 

5/18 

8V524 

22      59 

8T53 

14     25 

63324 

15   29 

29     36 

23    15  ; 

3A13 

25     17 

11a  7 

17     25 

20     16 

5M    2 

21     41 

28      7 

20    52 

29     59 

14015 

8,a  4 

17     32 

8^41 

13    45 

29     26 

2W    9 

17      12 

4a43 

11059 

5<JII5 

14T1510 

29     13 

22   48 

iirR47 

21      52 

26     13 

IIV322 

14         2 

29      31 

17     59 

26       I 

19    29 

28       I 

140524 

7njli9 

15     52 

4  "150 

8/31 

23   15 

25    57 

I2T     I 

1029 

I033    7 

3nP32 

11-34 

29     37 

21     32 

29     43 

17     33 

20    40 

5«   7 

7>^58 

24     44 

15     12 

^J       'Z 

17     24 

24     50 

I4A4I 

5^20 

13-17 

0/    3 

2V342 

16     59 

20       6 

7  a  43 

29     10 

8,a28 

i^  5 

7m52 

29     26 

18     44 

26     32 

12     20 

14     38 

28    55 

2T25 

21       I 

133320 

22       38 

14    35 

20    41 

I3"R45 

I  "143 

9"127 

24     26 

26    30 

10x59 

14     59 

4n39 

27    41 

6np45 

27    54 

3/19 

27     35 

14     19 

22       4 

6V3  24 

8«22 

23     14 

27     51 

18     39 

i2.aio 

20     47 

iim  3 

15     47 

10-55 

26     37 

4/24 

18     18 

20      18 

5T46 

II  «    7 

333  0 

26   42 

4-42 

24       I 

28      5 

23     49 

8/42 

16     32 

oatii 

2X22 

18    40 

24     49 

17     39 

IITipi2 

18     27 

6/47 

10V515 

6ni2o 

20     38 

28     30 

12      8 

14     39 

2«     0 

8058 

2^32 

25     35 

2111  0 

19    21 

22     17 

18     33 

10VJ24 

24     14 

27      14 

15      48 

23     33 

17     30 

9^45 

15     ^9 

1V342 

4a;i2 

0/34 

22     17 

6x34 

loTii 

on  6 

83330 

2nR25 

23    38 

28     21 

13    51 

16      2 

12     27 

4«i5 

23     35 

23     41 

17       9 

II  /    6 

27    49 

M 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

I 

0      t 
9H37 

0      » 
24T44 

0      t 
4«i3 

0       f 
23040 

0      f 
2A14 

0      f 
2511532 

3»n.46 

0      1 
23/0 

0      / 
8«56 

0       t 
11x20 

0      1 
25T50 

0         ; 

29  a  38 

2 

21     30 

7«22 

16    56 

73324 

16    20 

9—28 

17       9 

5V330 

20    49 

23     10 

8«i5 

12051 

3 

3T34 

20      22 

29    58 

21     23 

OITP3I 

23     17 

0/20 

17     47 

2x37 

5T  4 

20    53 

26    18 

4 

15     54 

3048 

i3n2o 

5^36 

14    45 

611158 

13     18 

29     55 

14    25 

17      6 

3n43 

93359 

5 

28     35 

17     43 

27      5 

20       I 

28     59 

20    30 

26       4 

"«55 

26     14 

29     i6 

16    47 

23    48 

6 

ii«4i 

233    7 

110S12 

4nP36 

13  —  10 

3/50 

8V338 

23     49 

8t   7 

11  a  36 

033    2 

7^44 

7 

25     17 

16    55 

25    42 

19     15 

27     17 

16    56 

21       0 

5M38 

20       5 

24      7 

13       28 

21     44 

8 

9n23 

2A   3 

10A29 

3^54 

I1 11113 

29    48 

3«io 

17     25 

2  b  12 

6051 

27      5 

5  "546 

9 

23  58 

17     19 

25     29 

18     25 

24     56 

12V324 

15     10 

29     13 

14      31 

19    49 

10^53 

19    50 

0 

802556 

2n5  35 

ionp33 

211142 

8/21 

24    45 

27       3 

iiT   5 

27      4 

3®  3 

24  51 

3^56 

I 

24      8 

17     39 

25     32 

16    41 

21     27 

60:53 

8X51 

23       6 

9056 

16    34 

915  0 

18      2 

2 

9<a23 

2-24 

10—19 

0/17 

4V314 

18    50 

20     39 

5  a  20 

23       8 

0A23 

23   19 

2111  6 

3 

24     30 

16     44 

24     45 

13     30 

16    42 

0x40 

2T30 

17     50 

63343 

14    31 

7^45 

16      6 

4 

9np22 

011136 

811147 

26     19 

28    53 

12     28 

14     29 

0043 

20     44 

28     56 

22     If 

0/   0 

5 

23    51 

14       I 

22     22 

8V348 

io«53 

24     20 

26    43 

14       0 

5<a  8 

i3nP37 

611143 

13    42 

6 

7=^54 

27       2 

5/31 

21       0 

22     44 

6T20 

9ai5 

27    44 

19     53 

2a    28 

21       3 

27      9 

7 

21     33 

9/41 

18     17 

20:58 

4>^33 

18     34 

22      10 

113356 

4nP53 

13-23 

5/    9 

10V319 

.8 

4^49 

22       3 

0V542 

14    49 

16     25 

i«    7 

5n32 

26     33 

20       2 

28     13 

18    55 

23     10 

^9 

17    45 

4V3I2 

12     51 

26    38 

28     25 

14      3 

19      22 

11JI29 

5^  9 

1211150 

2V319 

5«42 

JO 

0/24 

16     II 

24     48 

8x29 

10T38 

27    23 

33338 

26     38 

20       7 

27      7 

15     18 

17     58 

21 

12    49 

28       3 

6a:  39 

20    26 

23       7 

iin  9 

18   16 

1ITIJ149 

4^45 

II  /   0 

27    55 

29     59 

22 

25       4 

9«53 

18     27 

2T34 

5«57 

25    16 

3<$l  9 

26     53 

19       0 

24     26 

ioasi2 

11x52 

23 

7V310 

21     41 

OK16 

M     55 

19      7 

93341 

18       9 

II:ii:42 

2/48 

7V325 

22     14 

23     39 

24 

19      9 

3>^3i 

12       9 

27     32 

2037 

24    17 

m  7 

26        10 

16      8 

20       0 

4X   6 

5T28 

25 

i«  3 

15     24 

24     10 

IO«24 

16    25 

8A57 

17     5^ 

1011113 

29      3 

2sei6 

.15    54 

17     23 

26 

12    54 

27     23 

6T19 

23     33 

03327 

23     33 

2  —  27 

23       52 

11V536 

14     17 

27    43 

29     31 

27 

24    42 

9T29 

18     40 

6056 

14    38 

8nji    2 

16     41 

7/    6 

23     51 

26      9 

9r38 

ii«54 

28 

6K31 

21     45 

I  a  13 

20     31 

28    53 

22      18 

011134 

19    59 

5«52 

7x56 

21     44 

24     38 

29 

18    22 

13    58 

43317 

13A  9 

6  —  21 

14      7 

2KJ33 

i'7    45 

19    44 

4a    5 

7043 

30 

0T18 

26    58 

18     12 

27     21 

20      II 

27    21 

14     52 

29    33 

IT37 

16    42 

21     12 

31 

12     24 

ioni2 

1111529 

10/18 

26    58 

13     38 

533  0 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  189&-1897 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

r 

Nov. 

Dec 

0      t 

0      1 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0          r 

0      1 

0      f    1    0      f 

0          r 

0 

I 

1905  5 

II1W35 

5-  8 

28111  3 

4V3I7 

2o«58 

23K  4 

6b  39 

21030     250548 

i6nBro 

24---^ 

2 

3A33 

26    23 

20      9 

12/12 

17     34 

3KIO 

4T57 

18    40 

40517       9A17 

0—48    "      9m. 

3 

17    46 

II-   I 

4  "153 

25    52 

OW24 

15      9 

16    48 

0055 

17    28  1  23     14 

15     48 

24    . 

4 

2TIJHO 

25     23 

19     15 

9V3   4 

12     52 

27      0 

28    41 

13     25 

^Sl  4        7'»R38 

I  HI    I 

9 /J 

5 

16    31 

911129 

3/12 

21     51 

25       2 

8T49 

iob43 

26     15 

15       7 

22      28 

16     18 

24     1 

6 

0^46 

23     15 

16  ,43 

4—16 

6K58 

20     41 

22     57 

1    90528 

29     33 

7^36 

I  /zS 

8V54 

7 

M     53 

6/44 

29    50 

26     25 

18     48 

2  b  40 

5026 

23      2 

i4nBi9  i  22     53 

16     ig    1    22     j 

8 

28    51 

19    55 

I2V336 

28     22 

OT35 

14      49 

18     12 

6^58 

29     18  J     81a  9 

OV545    1      6=rr 

9 

1211140 

21150 

25       4 

10KI2 

12     24 

27      II 

i®i7 

21     13 

14—21 

23      12 

14     41        19     : 

10 

26     18 

15     31 

7«i9 

21     59 

24     18 

9047 

14     40 

5nji4i 

29     19 

7/54 

28       7          1^5 

II 

9/45 

27    59 

19     22 

3T47 

6  b  20 

22      38 

28     19 

20     17 

14  "I  4 

22         9 

iiw   5        14     : 

12 

23       I 

low  16 

IK  19 

15     37 

18     32 

50542 

I2AII 

4^56 

28     30 

5KJ56 

23     39       26     I 

13 

6V3  3 

22     24 

13     10 

27     32 

on54 

18      58 

26     14 

19     30 

12/34 

19      15 

5K55         STL 

14 

18    52 

4>^23 

24     58 

9«33 

13     27 

2,n.26 

ionji24 

3^56 

26     15 

2a  9 

!   17      58    ,    20 

15 

ia27 

16     16 

6T46 

21     42 

26     12 

16        4 

24     37 

18     10 

9V333  1  14     43 

29      52 

ib5< 

16 

13    48 

28      5 

18     36 

4n  0 

9®  7 

29      51 

8-52 

2/    9 

22     31  1  27      0 

IIT43 

13     5 

17 

25     57 

9T52 

Ob  29 

16    28 

22     15 

13^47 

23      5 

15     52 

5W12  ;   9K  6 

23     33 

25     5. 

18 

7^55 

21     42 

12     29 

29     9 

5<a35 

27      51 

7"li5 

29     20 

17     39 

21       3 

5  a  26 

8n  . 

19 

19    46 

3«36 

24    37 

120B  5 

19      9 

12—    3 

21     20 

I2V333 

29     55 

2T57 

17     23 

20       2" 

20 

IT34 

15     40 

6056 

25    17 

2n»58 

26      20 

5/17 

25     31 

12  K   2 

14    48 

29     27 

3®  < 

21 

13    22 

27    58 

19     31 

8A49 

17       3 

1011140 

19      4 

8«i5 

24       2  1  26     39 

]  "n37 

15     4^ 

22 

25     16 

ion  35 

20B24 

22    43 

1—23 

24     59 

2V340 

20    47 

5T57 

8  b  32 

1  23     55 

28     4( 

23 

7b2i 

23     34 

15     40 

6nR59 

15     56 

9/13 

16      2 

3K   7 

i  17    50 

20    28 

60521 

1     IIA4^ 

24 

19    42 

60B58 

29    20 

21     35 

011139 

23     15 

29       8 

15     17 

29    41 

2n29 

18     57 

25       i 

25 

2024 

20     49 

i3<n.26 

6-29 

15     24 

7KJ   3 

ii«59 

27     19 

1  II  «  32 

H    35 

1A45 

SBBif 

26 

15    29 

5<a  7 

27    57 

21     33 

0/    3 

20    31 

24     34 

9T14 

1  23     27 

26    50 

1  14     47 

22       iS 

27 

29      I 

19    49 

I2IIR50 

611139 

14     30 

3«38 

6M54 

21       6 

5028 

9®i5 

28       6 

6— IJ 

28 

120857 

4nB49 

27    59 

21     36 

28     37 

16     25 

19       2 

2  b  56 

17    39 

21     55 

iinR43 

20       22 

29 

27  17 

19     58 

13^15 

6/15 

I2V320 

28     52 

IT   I 

14      50 

OOB    3 

4«$153 

25     42 

4"142 

30 

".5155 

n 

28     28 

20     30 

25'  37 

iix  4 

12     53 

26      50 

12    44 

18     14 

10—   2 

19     10 

31 

26    43 

ll 

1311126 

8»28 

24     44 

9n  2 

1 

inR59 

3/41 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov.          Dec 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0      / 

0      1 

0       1 

0      1 

0      t 

0        r 

or             0         • 

I 

18/11 

8«45 

i7«50 

4T26 

7  b  21 

22  n  I 

25  OB  36 

i^W  8 

6v\26\ 

15/49 

8»  0  1   13x5s 

2 

2V332 

21     55 

0x38 

16    30 

19    13 

40B  5 

8<JII2 

27     46 

20    46 

oW  3 

21     20      26    40 

3 

16    39 

4x48 

13     14 

28    29 

in  5 

16    16 

21         0 

11  —  36 

5/   2 

14      0 

4K22        9T  6 

4 

oar  27 

17    2^ 

25     39 

IOb24 

12    58 

28    37 

4nji  3 

25     36 

19     II 

27    41 

17       7      21     15 

5 

13    53 

29    47 

7T53 

22      16 

24    55 

iicJi  9 

17    20 

9^44 

3>3i3 

ii«  7 

29    40       3  a  23 

6 

26    57 

11T56 

19    58 

4n  7 

60B57 

23    57 

0^53 

23     58 

17      6 

24     19 

I2T    2         15       21 

7 

9H39 

23    55 

lb  56 

16      0 

19      9 

7n  3 

14    44 

8/15 

o«5o 

7K19 

24       16        27       14 

8 

22      2 

5W49 

13    49 

28     0 

i«a34 

20    30 

28    51 

22     33 

14    23 

20      7 

6  b  22          911    ^ 

9 

4T11 

17    41 

25    41 

lOOBIO 

14  17 

4—22 

I3"li3 

61I48 

27     44 

2T45 

18      22        20      S^ 

10 

16      9 

29    37 

7n35 

22     35 

27      21 

18    37 

27     47 

20     58 

IOK54 

15     13 

oni7 

2®  4b 

II 

28      2 

iin4i 

19    36 

5A20 

I01IR52 

3"li4 

12/29 

4«57 

23     50 

27     31 

12         8 

14     42 

12 

9«54 

23    57 

10S48 

18    29 

24  51 

•18       9 

27     II 

18     43 

6T33 

9  a  39 

23    57 

26     42 

13 

21     50 

60B29 

14     18 

2I1B    7 

9—18 

3/14 

IIVJ48 

2K14 

19       2 

21     39 

5®  47 

8<Jl49 

14 

3n55 

19    22 

27      8 

16    14 

24  II 

18     20 

26     12 

15     26 

lb  18 

3n33 

17    40 

21      s 

15 

16     II 

2A36 

10  A  23 

0=2=50 

911122 

3>5i7 

ioa:i8 

28     20 

13     23 

15     23 

29    41 

3nK4i 

16 

28    42 

16     II 

24      5 

15     49 

24  41 

17     56 

24      3 

10T57 

25     20 

27     12 

"<a55 

16     34 

17 

HOB  28 

OIIR    7 

8nRi3 

iwi  3 

9/58 

2WII 

7K24 

23     17 

7ni2 

9QB  5 

24  27 1 

29     48 

18 

24      31 

14       20 

22     45 

16    21 

25     I 

16        0 

20    23 

5  a  25 

19     3 

21       7 

7"»2I 

13^28 

19 

7^49 

28    45 

7=^34 

1/31 

9V34I 

29      22 

3T   I 

17    23 

00558 

3<a23 

20    42 

27     34 

20 

21     22 

13-17 

22     33 

16    25 

23     54 

12X18 

15     21 

29     i6 

13      3 

15    59 

4^33 

12111  6 

21 

5n  6 

27     49 

7  "133 

OV354 

7«38 

24     53 

27     28 

iin  9 

25     23 

28    59 

18    53 

26     59 

22 

19    I 

i2iai6 

22     23 

14    57 

20    53 

7TIO 

9«26 

23       6 

8<a  2 

1211527 

311141     12/6 

23 

3^  4 

26   34 

6/58 

28    32 

3^45 

19     15 

21     19 

50B13 

21     4 

26    25 

18    49  i  27     19 

24 

17     II 

10/40 

21     13 

ii«43 

16     16 

I  b  II 

3ni2 

17     33 

4nR32 

10^50 

4/   71 

I2>326 

25 

I  ni22 

24    33 

5V3  7 

24     32 

28     31 

13       4 

15       8 

oSl  9 

18    24 

25     39 

19    24 

27   19 

26 

15    34 

8V3I2 

18     38 

7^  3 

IOT35 

24     55 

27  13 

13       4 

2-39 

1011143 

4«30 

ii»5i 

^Z 

29    44 

21     38 

IW50 

19    21 

22     32 

6050 

90527 

26     20 

17     12 

25     52 

19     15 

25     56 

28 

13/50 

4»50 

14    45 

1T30 

4  b  24 

18    49 

21     55 

9"K54 

im55 

10/55 

Z^i^ 

9x34 

29 

27    50 

27    26 

13    31 

16     16 

00B55 

4<J136 

23     46 

16    40 

25     44 

17     29 

22    45 

30 

11V341 

9^55 

25     28 

28      8 

13     II 

17    32 

7-52 

1/20 

IOV3I3 

0x55 

5T32 

31 

25     20 

22     15 

ion   2 

onp43 

22       7 

24     18 

r8      0 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1898-1899 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      t 

0      / 

0      t 

0      f 

0      t 

0      1 

0            t 

0      / 

0      / 

0         r 

0      t 

0      f 

I 

Ob  12 

i4ni3 

22  n  8 

5<J149 

8nB55 

28=2-  4 

5/52 

29V335 

21K52 

27T29 

13035 

150541 

2 

12     13 

26      3 

3©58 

18     13 

22      6 

1211134 

20    53 

I4«32 

5T50 

iob32 

25     39 

27    29 

3 

24      6 

7058 

15    54 

onB58 

5=2=44 

27    26 

6V3   3 

29     16 

19    24 

23   14 

7®33 

9  A 16 

4 

5056 

20       I 

28      I 

14      7 

19    50 

12/32 

21     14 

13x42 

2«34 

5n38 

19    21 

21      7 

5 

17    46 

2A15 

io,a22 

27    39 

411119 

27    43 

6«i6 

27     43 

15     20 

17    45 

iSl  8 

3nB  7 

6 

29    38 

14     41 

23       I 

11^35 

19      6 

12W50 

21       I 

11T19 

27     45 

29    41 

13       0 

15   20 

7 

11035 

27     21 

5n«59 

25     49 

4/    2 

27    42 

5K22 

24     27 

9053 

1 1 05  30 

^5      I 

27   52 

8 

23    38 

ion){i6 

19     16 

ioin.17 

18    59 

I2«l6 

19      18 

7  b  12 

21     48 

23     18 

719118 

10-47 

9 

5<J150 

23     25 

2^S^ 

24     51 

3V348 

26     26 

2T47 

19    35 

3«B38 

5<aio 

19    54 

24      8 

10 

18     12 

6^46 

16      40 

9/24 

i8*  23 

lOKII 

15     51 

1043 

15    25 

17  13 

2^53 

711156 

II 

onB45 

20     20 

011140 

23     51 

2»40 

23     34 

28    33 

13    38 

27     17 

29    29 

16     17 

22     II 

12 

13     31 

4111  6 

14      46 

8V3  8 

16    38 

6T34 

iob56 

25     27 

9<ai6 

i2nB  4 

oni  6 

6/49 

13 

26     32 

18       I 

28      56 

22     14 

OK  17 

19     17 

23       4 

70614 

21      28 

24     59 

14     17 

21     43 

14 

9=^50 

2/    6 

13/6 

6w  7 

13      38 

lb  44 

5n  2 

19      3 

3n»54 

8-15 

28    44 

6V346 

15 

23     26 

16     18 

27      14 

19    48 

26    43 

13     58 

16    53 

0A58 

16   36 

21     50 

13/22 

21     49 

16 

711121 

OKJ37" 

IIV319 

3M18 

9T33 

26       2 

28    40 

13       I 

29     34 

511141 

28      2 

6«r42 

17 

21     34 

14    58 

25      20 

16     36 

22     II 

7n58 

100527 

25     14 

12-47 

19     45 

12V340 

21     21 

18 

6/   4 

29    20 

9x16 

29    44 

4«37 

19     50 

22     17 

I  "839 

26     13 

3/56 

27      9 

5K39 

19 

20    47 

i3«37 

23       6 

12T40 

16    53 

10538 

4.JI11 

20     16 

911150 

18     10 

iia26 

19    35 

20 

5V337 

27    46 

6K48 

25     24 

29      0 

13     25 

16     12 

3^  6 

23     37 

2V324 

25     30 

3TIO 

21 

20    27 

11K40 

20     19 

7«56 

ion  58 

25     13 

28    21 

16     10 

7/30 

16    34 

9K19 

16    23 

22 

5«  9 

25     16 

3T37 

20     15 

22    51 

7Si  6 

1011B42 

29    27 

21     30 

oas40 

22     54 

29    17 

23 

19    37 

8T33 

16    40 

2U23 

4®39 

19      5 

23     15 

i2ni58 

5V534 

14     41 

6TI4 

"»55 

24 

3>^44 

21     28 

29    27 

14      21 

16    25 

I»»RI5 

6^  4 

26    42 

19    43 

28    37 

19     22 

24    19 

25 

17    28 

4W    4 

"«57 

26      II 

28     14 

13     39 

19     10 

10/40 

3«56 

12K25 

2  b  16 

6n32 

26 

0T47 

16    21 

24     12 

73559 

io,a  9 

26     31 

211135 

24    52 

18     10 

26      5 

14     58 

18    36 

27 

13    41 

28     24 

6ni4 

19    47 

22      14 

9=2=25 

16    21 

9V316 

2K22 

9T36 

27     28 

00B32 

28 

26     14 

ion  18 

18       8 

i<a42 

411536 

22     53 

0/28 

23    49 

16      28 

22    54 

9n45 

12     24 

29 

8«29 

29    57 

13    48 

17    18 

611148 

14    55 

8a27 

OT24 

5«57 

21     52 

24   n 

30 

20    31 

110046 

26     IZ 

0.£i:25 

21       8 

29    39 

23      5 

14      6 

18    45 

3®5o 

est  0 

31 

2024 

23    42 

14      0 

MKJ35 

7x35 

in  18 

17   50 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0      t 

0      1 

0      / 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0      t 

0         r 

0     t 

0      t 

0      f 

I 

29  A  44 

15=2=49 

25-38 

15/49 

24KJ31 

17x52 

25T47 

I3n59 

2905    4 

in)t20 

16—  9 

20111  0 

2 

linB46 

28    37 

811136 

29    36 

8»40 

IT44 

8b57 

26     12 

io<a53 

13     18 

28    47 

3/24 

3 

23     59 

II 11143 

21    48 

13V333 

22     49 

15     22 

21     50 

80514 

22      43 

25     23 

II 11139 

17      6 

4 

6=G:28 

25     10 

5/14 

27    40 

6K57 

28    48 

4n28 

20     10 

411R36 

7^37 

24     44 

IV3   3 

5 

19     16 

9/   0 

18    56 

iia56 

21       I 

lib  59 

16    52 

2<a  I 

16    33 

20       I 

8/    2 

15     " 

6 

2ia28 

23     13 

2V355 

26    19 

4T59 

24    55 

29      6 

13   51 

28    37 

211135 

21     31 

29     26 

7 

16       5 

7KJ50 

17     13 

10M45 

18    48 

7039 

II05II 

25   41 

10-47 

15     19 

5V310 

I3«45 

8 

0/  10 

22     45 

i«46 

25       9 

2  b  24 

20       8 

23       9 

7nji33 

23       6 

28     14 

18     59 

28      3 

9 

14     40 

7«52 

16     32 

9T25 

15    45 

205  26 

5A   2 

19   29 

5^134 

11/21 

2«57 

12K17 

10 

29    33 

23      2 

IH23 

23     27 

28     49 

14  32 

16    52 

I --30 

18     15 

24    41 

17      2 

26    25 

II 

14V341 

8k   6 

16     13 

7W10 

iin36 

26    30 

28     42 

13    40 

I  /  10 

8V3I5 

IK  14 

10T26 

12 

29    56 

22    53 

0T52 

20     32 

24      5 

8^22 

ionB33 

26      0 

14     23 

22       6 

15     30 

24     16 

13 

i5«  7 

7T16 

15     12 

3n3i 

60S2O 

20      12 

22     31 

811136 

27     56 

6ai2 

29    47 

7W56 

14 

OK  6 

21     II 

29       8 

16      8 

18      22 

2IIR    3 

4^37 

21      29 

1H551 

20     35 

14T  2 

21     25 

15 

14    43 

4W37 

I2b38 

28    27 

OAI6 

14         0 

16     57 

4/45 

26     10 

5x10 

28     II 

4040 

16 

28    55 

17     34 

25    40 

10  OB  30 

12         6 

26         7 

29     34 

18   25 

10*50 

19    53 

12  b   8 

17    42 

17 

I2T39 

on  8 

8ni8 

22    24 

23    57 

8^29 

1211132 

2V332 

25    47 

4T37 

25     50 

00530 

18 

25     56 

12     22 

20    35 

4A14 

519155 

21         0 

25     55 

17      5 

IOK54 

19     14 

9ni4 

13       4 

19 

8«48 

24    23 

28537 

16      4 

18      3 

4^13 

9/44 

2SS     I 

26      0 

3«37 

22       18 

25     25 

20 

21     20 

69BI4 

14     29 

28       I 

0^26 

17     41 

24      0 

17      12 

10T56 

17     39 

5®  3 

7<a34 

21 

3n35 

18      0 

26     17 

lonB  7 

13       8 

1/33 

8VJ4I 

2K30 

25     31 

ini7 

17     30 

19     34 

22 

15     38 

29     47 

8,a  5 

22     29 

26     12 

15     49 

23     41 

17     43 

9b4i 

14     30 

29    43 

inB28 

23 

27     32 

11A38 

19   59 

5=2=  6 

911136 

OV325 

8«52 

2T41 

23     22 

27     18 

ii.a43 

13     20 

24 

gas  22 

23     34 

211R  2 

18       2 

23     22 

15     14 

24       4 

17     15 

6n34 

90546 

23     37 

25     13 

25 

21       9 

5»»R39 

14    16 

1 11114 

7/26 

oar  9 

9K   8 

I  b2I 

19     20 

21      56 

5"K29 

7-13 

26 

2<a57 

17     53 

26   43 

14     43 

21     43 

15       2 

23     54 

14    57 

10544 

3«a55 

17     24 

19     24 

27 

14     48 

Ots=i7 

9-24 

28     25 

6V3IO 

29     47 

8T18 

28      4 

13     52 

15    48 

29     26 

1 11151 

28 

26    44 

12     52 

22    18 

12/  17 

20     40 

14K16 

22     14 

ion  47 

25     49 

27    39 

11-39 

14     37 

29 

8nR46 

511125 

26     17 

5«  9 

28     27 

5«44 

23       9 

7«a39 

9nR33 

24       8 

27     46 

30 

20     56 

18    43 

IOVJ23 

19     33 

12T17 

18     49 

50516 

19     29 

21     34 

611154 

II  /20 

31 

3=2=16 

2/  II 

3K48 

1033 

17     13 

3^45 

25     18 

Digitized  by 


Google 


THE  PLACE  OF  THE  MOON  FOR  THE  YEARS  1900-1 901 


DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec. 

0            1 

0      f 

0      / 

0      t 

0      t 

0      f 

c           t 

0      t 

0      1 

0      t 

0           / 

0             r 

I 

9V537 

2K40 

10K49 

4»i7 

ion  43 

2805  2 

on»39 

14^33 

29111  4 

3>3i5 

23»27 

2TI0 

2 

24     13 

17    48 

26     10 

18     45 

24    16 

10  A  29 

12     39 

26    26 

11/30 

16    23 

7x42 

16   38 

3 

8*58 

2T41 

11T19 

2044 

7®23 

22    41 

24     34 

811127 

24     18 

^9     58 

22      19 

I  «  12 

4 

23    46 

17     13 

26      7 

16     15 

20       8 

411542 

6tQr26 

20    39 

7>33i 

I4«    I 

7TII 

15      48 

5 

8X28 

I  b20 

IO«28 

29     19 

2<a33 

16    37 

18      21 

3/    9 

21     14 

28     32 

22     13 

0  0  20 

6 

22     59 

15         I 

24    19 

II3B59 

14     43 

28    31 

fOTIl24 

16      0 

5-27 

13x28 

7«i5 

14       42 

7 

7T14 

28      18 

7D42 

24    20 

26     43 

10=2=27 

12     39 

29     18 

20      8 

28     40 

22      8 

28     4& 

8 

21     II 

iini3 

20     39 

6^27 

8I1B37 

22     30 

25    10 

13V3   3 

5x11 

13T58 

6045 

120535 

9 

4«50 

23    51 

33814 

18    24 

20     29 

4TI144 

8/     2 

27     16 

20,   26 

29     12 

21       0 

25     59 

10 

18     II 

6(015 

15     33 

011R17 

2-5.24 

17     12 

21       16 

ii»53 

5T43 

I4«  II 

40649 

9A   I 

II 

ini7 

18    29 

27     40 

12      8 

14     25 

29     57 

:4V35o 

26    46 

20     51 

28     47 

18     12 

21     42 

12 

14      9 

o<a35 

9«$139 

24       I 

26     35 

12/59 

18  53 

11K48 

5«40 

12057 

I A 10 

419   3 

13 

26    48 

12      36 

21     33 

5^58 

811155 

26    20 

3aii 

26    48 

20      5 

26     38 

13    46 

16     10 

14 

9flBi7 

24  32 

3n»25 

18       I 

21     27 

9V356 

17     42 

11T38 

4D   3 

90552 

26      3 

28       7 

15 

21     36 

6nR26 

15     18 

OTIIII 

4/12 

23    48 

2K19 

26     10 

17     35 

22     43 

8115  8 

9^57 

16 

3A47 

18     19 

27     II 

12      29 

17     II 

7«50 

16    55 

IOb22 

00543 

5A14 

20       3 

21     48 

17 

15     50 

OsG.11 

9:^   8 

24    57 

OW22 

22       I 

1T25 

24       12 

13     32 

17     30 

1^54 

311142 

18 

27    47 

12       6 

21       8 

7/35 

13     47 

6m  16 

15    45 

7n42 

26       3 

29     34 

13     44 

15     45 

19 

911R40 

24       5 

3»ni5 

20    25 

27     25 

20    32 

29    50 

20      52 

8lfl22 

11115  30 

25     37 

27     59 

20 

21     32 

6in.i2 

15     29 

3V530 

11SK15 

4T46 

13W41 

30546 

20      31 

23     23 

711136 

10/28 

21 

3-24 

18    32 

27     53 

16    52 

25     16 

i8    56 

27     18 

16      27 

2nR33 

5^13 

19    42 

23     13 

22 

15    22 

1/7 

10/31 

o«3i 

9K28 

2«59 

10041 

28      56 

14     30 

17       4 

1/59 

6>5I5 

23 

27    29 

14       3- 

23     26 

14     30 

23     47 

16    54 

23     51 

IIA16 

26     23 

28     58 

14     26 

19      33 

24 

9m5i 

27  25 

6KJ43 

28    48 

8tii 

0039 

60549 

2      28 

8.^14 

1011156 

27      6 

3~   5 

25 

22      31 

IIV3I5 

20     23 

13K22 

22     36 

14     12 

19    35 

5"R33 

20       4 

22     59 

9V359 

16     49 

26 

5/35 

^     34 

4»30 

28      9 

6«57 

27     33 

2S111 

17     31 

111156 

5/11 

23       5 

0K43 

27 

19      5 

^oar2i 

19      2 

13T  0 

21     10 

10  SB  39 

14     35 

29     24 

13     51 

17     32 

6«25 

14     43 

28 

3V3  4 

25     29 

3x56 

27     49 

5n  9 

23      30 

26    49 

11^14 

25     52 

OV5  7 

20      0 

28     48 

29 

17     31 

19      5 

I2«26 

18    52 

6A  6 

811553 

23      3 

8/   4 

12     56 

3x50 

12T56 

30 

2aS2I 

4T18 

26      46 

23515 

18     29 

20    51 

4^155 

20    30 

26      5 

17     54 

27       6 

31 

17     28 

19    26 

15       18 

2^43 

16    54 

9«34 

II  «  15 

DM 

Jan. 

Feb. 

March 

April 

May 

June 

July 

August 

Sept. 

Oct. 

Nov. 

Dec 

0      t 

0          r 

0      t 

0      1 

0      t 

0         r 

0      » 

0      t 

0      f 

0      t 

0      t 

0       » 

I 

25W23 

i6flBi3 

25®  59 

l2nR59 

15=2=52 

0/   8 

3V324 

2i«57 

14T  6 

23 «    I 

i5®35 

21 A  47 

2 

9025 

29    21 

8A46 

25       2 

27    41 

12      13 

16      9 

5>^49 

28     38 

7n35 

29    21 

419150 

3 

23    20 

12A17 

21     23 

6:^59 

9^30 

24      28 

29      9 

19    51 

13  «   3 

21     53 

12A43 

17     29 

4 

7®  5 

25       I 

3nR49 

18     52 

21     21 

6KJ55 

I2SS23 

3T58 

27    20 

50551 

25    42 

29     48 

5 

20    36 

7"R3o 

16      5 

oin.41 

3/16 

19     34 

25      50 

18      8 

11025 

19    30 

811521 

11=2=53 

6 

3<a5i 

19    47 

28     12 

12     29 

15     18 

2S»26 

9X29 

2«l8 

25     19 

2A50 

20    44 

23     47 

7 

16   48 

1-52 

lO^IO 

24     19 

27    30 

15     33 

23      17 

16    26 

90B   I 

15    54 

2^54 

5^35 

8 

29  27 

13    47 

22      2 

6/13 

9KJ53 

28    56 

7TI4 

0031 

22     32 

28    42 

14    55 

17     21 

9 

iinR49 

25    37 

3m5o 

18     15 

22     31 

I2M34 

21      18- 

14     33 

5<Jl5o 

IIB5I7 

26    48 

29       9 

10 

23     57 

7^25 

15    38 

0V330 

5«27 

26    29 

5«29 

28     29 

18     57 

23    40 

811137 

II  /    0 

II 

5=2=54 

19     17 

27    29 

13       2 

18     43 

10T39 

19  46 

120B19 

119151 

5=^52 

20    24 

22     57 

12 

17     45 

1/18 

9/29 

25     56 

2K2I 

25       4 

4n  5 

26       I 

14    32 

17    55 

2/12 

5V3   2 

13 

29     34 

13    34 

21     43 

9«I4 

16      23 

9«40 

18     25 

9A31 

27         0 

29    51 

14      2 

17     15 

14 

iini28 

26     10 

4V316 

22     59 

OT47 

24     23 

20540 

22     47 

9-14 

II 11141 

25    56 

29     39 

15 

23    32 

9>3ii 

17     12 

7>^i3 

15      30 

9D   6 

16    46 

5nP46 

21       18 

23    27 

7V358 

I2s:i4 

16 

5/49 

22     38 

o«37 

21     52 

Ob  28 

23     45 

0A38 

18     29 

3mi3 

5/14 

20     10 

25       2 

17 

18    25 

6«32 

14     30 

6T51 

15    32 

8aBio 

14     13 

0=5=55 

15     I 

17      3 

2«35 

8x   5 

18 

1V323 

20     50 

28    52 

22       2 

on34 

22     18 

27     27 

13       6 

26   47 

29      0 

15     17 

21      26 

19 

14    42 

5>^28 

13K39 

7«i6 

15  25 

6A   2 

10 115  20 

25      5 

8rGr36 

IIV3  7 

28     19 

5T   5 

20 

28    24 

20     16 

28    41 

22     22 

29     59 

19     23 

22     52 

6  "155 

20       32 

23     31 

11x44 

19       4 

21 

I2»23 

5T   7 

13T51 

7ni2 

i4aB  9 

2n5i9 

5=^   7 

18    43 

2V342 

•  6«i6 

25    35 

3«23 

22 

26    37 

19     52 

28    57 

21    39 

1  27     53 

14     53 

17      9       0/33 

'5    2 

19     25 

9T51 

18        I 

23 

10(58 

4«25 

13W51 

5®4i 

1   "All 

27       8 

1  29       I  ,   12     31 

27       58 

3X    I 

25     30 

2n54 

24 

25     22 

18     42 

28     26 

19     17 

i  24       4 

9-.  9 

;  10 11150  t  24     42 

iiai3 

17       5 

9«29 

17     54 

25 

9T43 

2041 

12  0  39 

2A28 

1     611535  1  21       2 

22     40  ,     7V3IC 

24     55 

IT35 

24     40 

2®5^ 

26 

23     58 

16     23 

26    28 

15  17 

18    50  '     2ni5i 

4  /  38  j  20       0 

9M    4 

16     27 

9054 

17     42 

27 

8«    3 

29     49 

9®55 

27     47 

0^51  ,  14    40 

1  16     47  '     32=14 

23     35 

i«33 

25       0 

2^13 

28 

22       0 

13®   0 

23      2 

lOltR     2 

12     44      26    35 

'29     12  1   16     51 

8T22 

16    45 

90550 

16     20 

29 

5n47 

5^51 

22         6 

24     32  ;     8/39 

i  IIV355  !     0x50 

23     17 

in53 

24     17 

29     58 

30 

19    25 

18     25 

4-    I 

6  in  20 

20    55 

'  24     57      15       6 

8»i3 

16    48 

8A16 

131^   9 

31 

2054 

o«R47 

18     12 

,     8ai8      29     34 

10523 

25     53 

1 

;36is 

1 

1                1 

1 

7 

1  1- 

1    A 

c 

55 

3   • 

« 

Digitized  \ 

DyGO 

Ogle 

Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


3  2044  018  901  785 


Digitized  by 


Google 


Digitized  by 


Google 


