William Lilly 


Christian Astrology 


Book | 


An Introduction to Astrology 


Copyright 2003 World Astrology Network 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


To his most learned and vertuous friend 
Bolstrod Whitlock, Esq. 
One of the Members of the honorable 
House of Commons in this 
Present Parliament. 


Much honored Sir: 
Hope this Dedicatory Epistle of mine published without your knowledge, 
shall beget no such sinister construction in you, but that the fault shall 
be admitted as a venial transgression; and this my presumption finde 
easie remission at your most gentle hands. | am now so well acquainted with your 
pleasing native Disosition, that in things of this nature where you are not in question, 
| dare a little offend; for it’s a fixed naturall Maxime ingraffed in you, to love your 
friends sincerely, and rarely to take offence upon slight failings. 
Pardon this boldnesse; veily, so many, so numberlesse are my 
engagements upon you, that | could doe no lesse, having no other meanes 
remaining whereby to 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


expresse a gratefull heart, or to acquaint the present and future times, of your ardent 
and continuall promoting me and my poor labours, since first Divine Providence 
made me knowne unto you; so that | doe freely acknowledge, next unto Almighty 
God, your selfe have been the Instrumentall meanes of inabling me to performe, not 
onely what is already publique, but also this ensuing Treatise, which now | humbly 
offer unto your Patronage, as a thankfull testimony of my sincere respects due unto 
you: for had not you persevered all along a firme and an assured Maecenas unto me, 
my carkasse and Conceptions had beene buried in eternall silence; so that the 
Students in this Art must acknowledge the Restauration of Astrologie unto your 
goodnesse. For, SIR, you have countrenanced me your self; you have commended 
me to your Friends; you have never omitted to do me, or my friends for my lake, any 
civill courtsies: And this | shall adde to your honour, that | no sooner at any time 
importuned your favour, but | was instantly sensible of your actual and reall 
performance of the thing | required. 

Should | enumerate your vertues or curtesies in this kinde performed unto 
many besides my selfe, the day would faile me on of time, and my hand grow weary 
of writing: but as in private you assist your friends, so have you most faithfully for 
almost seven yeeres served your Countrey in this present Parliament, even to the 
manifest decay of your health, to my owne knowledge, and consumption of many 
thousand pounds of your Estate: you have refused no paines to benefit this 
Commonwealth; and being ever delegated an honourable Commissioner upon all 
Treaties for Peace betwixt the King and Parliament, you have demeaned your selfe 
with 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


such candour, judgement and integrity in all of them, that the whole Kingdome are 
satisfied therewith, and we of the Commonalty stand indebted unto you. 

Brevity best pleaseth you, few words may become me; yet | cannot rest in 
quiet untill | deliver those excellent expressions of yours, which my owne eares heard 
from your mouth in 1644. at what time this present Parliament was loe, and your selfe 
tampered withall to become Turncoat and renounce this Parliament; NO, Ile not 
remove from this present Parliament now sitting at Westminster, for unto this place 
was | called, and hither sent by my Countrey, for their service, and if God have so 
decreed, that his Majesty shall overcome us, yet am | resolved to abide here, and to 
dye within the wals of that very House; and | will take the same portion which God 
hath assigned to those honourable Members that shall continue firme in this cause. 
These words you have made good even unto this day, to your eternall honour; nor 
can the blacke mouthes of the most accursed snarling Curs dettact a grain from your 
worth. 

| have now a large Field to walke in, and should | futher proceed, | am 
assured | should move that sweet disposed temper of yours, which is not easily 
offended; | am silent; onely; 

Faveas (precor) primitiis crescentis indolis, quae si sub tuo sole adoleverit, 
et justam tandem maturitatem consequuta fuerit, non indignos fructus retributarum 
confido. 

SIR, | hope you shall have no dishonour to Patronize the Ensuing Worke, 
wherein | lay downe the whol 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


natturall grounds of the Art, in a fit Method: that thereby | may undeceive those, who 
maisled by some Pedling Divines, have upon no better credit then their bare words, 
conceived Astrology to consist upon Diabolicall Principles: a most scandalous 
untruth, foysted into both the Nobility and Gentries apprehansions, to deter them from 
this Study, and to reserve in intyre unto owne selves. 


Wishing to you and your honourable Consort all happinesse, | conclude in 
these last words, that | am with all my heart, 


Your most humble Servant, 
William Lilly 


Strand 16. 
Aug. 1647. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


To The Student In ASTROLOGY 


My friend, whoever thou art, that with so much ease shalt receive the benefit of my hard 
studies, and doth intend to proceed in this heavenly knowledge of the stars, wherein the 

great and admirable works of the invisible and alglorious God are so manifestly 
apparent. In the first place, consider and admire thy Creator, and be thankful unto him, be 
thou humble, and let no natural knowledge, how profound and transcendent soever it be, 
elate thy minde to neglect that divine Providence, by whose all-seeing order and 
appointment, all things heavenly and earthly, have their constant motion, but the more thy 
knowledge is enlarged, the more do thou magnifie the power and wisdom of Almighty God, 
and strive to preseve thy self in his favour; being confident, the more holy thou art; and more 
neer to God, the purer Judgment thou shalt give. Beware of pride and self-conceit, and 
remember how that long ago, no irrational Creature obey him, so long as he was Master of 
his own Reason and Passions, or until he subjected his Will to the unreasonable part. But 
alas! when iniquity abounded, and man gave the reins to his own affection, and deserted 
reason, then every Beast, Creature and outward harmful thing, became rebellious and 
unserviceable to his command. Stand fast, oh man! to thy God, and assured Principles, then 
consider thy own nobleness, how all created things, both present and to come, were for thy 
sake created; nay, for thy sake God became Man: thou art that Creature, who being 
conversant with Christ, liveth and reignest above the heavens, and sits above all power and 
authority. How many Pre-eminences, Priviledges, Advantages hath God bestowed on thee? 
thou rangest above the heavens by Contemplation, conceivest the motion and magnitude of 
the stars; thou talkest with Angels, yea with God himself; thou has all Creatures within thy 
Dominion, and keepest the Devils in subjection: Do not then, for shame, deface thy Nature, 
or make thy self unworthy of such Gifts, or deprive thy self of that great Power, Glory and 
Blessedness God hath alotted thee, by casting from thee his fear, for possession of a few 
imperfect pleasures. Having considered thy God, and what thy self art, during they being 
Gods servant; now receive instruction how in thy practice | would have thee carry thy self. 
As thou daily conversest with the heavens, so instruct and form thy minde according to the 
image of Divinity; learn all the ornaments of Vertue, be sufficiently instructed therein; be 
humane, curteous, familiar to all, easie of access, afflict not the Miserable with terror of a 
harsh Judgment; in such cases, let them know their hard fate by degrees; direct them to call 
on God to divert his Judgments impending over them; be modest, conversant with the 
Learned, Civil, Sober man, covet not an cilate; give freely to the poor, both money and 
judgment: let no worldly wealth procure an Erroneous Judgment from thee, or such as may 
dishonour the Art, or this divine Science: Love good men, cherish those honest men that 
cordially Study this Art: Be sparing in delivering Judgment against the Common-wealth thou 
livest in. Give not judgment of the death of thy Prince; yet | know experimentally, that 
Reges Subjucent Legibus Stellarum marry a wife of thy own; rejoyce in the number of they 
friends, avoid law and controversie: in they Study, be Totus in lIllis that thou maist be 
Singulus in Art; be not extravagant or desrious to learn every Science, be not Aliquid in 
Omnibus; be faithful, tenacious, betray on ones secrets, no no | charge thee never divulge 
either friend or enemies trust committed to thy faith. Instruct all men to Live well, be a good 
example thy self, avoid the fashion of the times, love thy own Native Country: exprobate no 
man, no not an enemy: be not dismayed, if ill spoken of, Conscientia Mille Testes; God 
suffers no sin unpunished, no lye unrevenged. 


WILLIAM LILLY. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


To The Reader 


naturally like to be in the year 1647, as any may read, either in my Epistle before 

the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, printed 1644. Or in page therof 108, as in 
the Epistle of Aglicus 1645, where you shall finde these words: | have run over more 
days then sixteen thousand five hundred fifty and nine, before | am sixteen thousand 
four hundred twenty two days old, | shall be in great hazard of my life, but that year 
which afflicts me will stagger a Monarch and Kingdom, &c.. What concerns my self, 
hath almost in full measure proved true, in 1647. Having in this untoward year been 
molested with palpitation of the Heart, with Hypoconary melancholy, a disaffected 
Spleen, the Scurvy, etc. and now at this present viz. August 1647, when | had almost 
concluded this Treatise, | am shut up of the Plague, having the 4" of August buried 
one Servant thereof, and on the 28. Of the same moneth another, my self and 
remainder of my Family enforces to leave my present seat, and betake myself to 
change of ayre; so that if either my present Epistles, or the latter part of the Book it 
felt be anything defective, as well they may, being written when my family and self 
were in such abundent sorrow and perplexity; | desire the Reader to be civill, as to 
pass over those slight imperfections (if any be) with a candid censure. 

| thank Almighty God, who hath prolonged my life this present, and 


have oft in my former Works hinted the many fears | had of that danger | was 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


hath, been so gracious unto me as to spare me a long whereby have been enabled 
now at length to perfect my introduction so oft by me promised, so earnestly desired 
by many well-wishers unto this learning. 

The latter part of my predictions concerning Monarchy,is now upon the stage and 
the eyes of millions attending what shall become of it: let me leave the event hereof 
unto God, who is hastening to require a strict account of some people entrusted in 
the Kingdomes affairs; fiat Justicia; vivat Rex; floreat Parlimentum. 

The Citizens of London make small reckoning of Astrology; there are in one of 
those Epistles of mine, words significant, and of which time will make them sensible 
(that they were not wrote in vain but now too late, actum est. To the work in hand,viz.. 
the book ensuing, which is divided into three Treatises, the first whereof doth with 
much facility, and after a new method, instruct the Student how to begin his work, 
viz., viz, it teacheth him the use of an Ephemeris, of the Table of Houses, &c. it 
aquaints him how to erect a figure of heaven, how therein to place the Planets, how 
to rectifie their motions to the hour of his Figure; it unfolds the nature of the Houses, 
of the Planets, of the Signs of the Zodiack, their division, and subdivision, their 
severall properties, terms of Art, and whatever else is fit for Learner to know before 
he enter upon judgment; unto whom and everyone that will be studious this way, | 
give these cautions. 

First, that he be very exact in knowing the use of his Ephemeris, and in setting a 
Scheam of Heaven for all the house of the day or night, and in reducing the motions 
of the Planets to the hour thereof when need requireth, and to know their characters 
distinctly and readily. 

Secondly, | would have the Student very perfect in knowing the nature of the Houses, 
that he may the better discover from what house to require judgment upon the 
ve een propounded, left for want of true understanding he mistake one thing for 
another. 

Thirdly, | would have him ready in, and well to understand the Debilities and 
Fortitudes of every Planet, both Essentiall and Accidentall. 

Fourthly, he must be well versed in discovering the Nature of the Significator, what 
he signifies naturally, what accidentally, and how to vary signification, as necessity 
shall require. 

Fifthly, let him well understand the nature of the Signs, their properties 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


and qualities, and what form, shape and conclusions they give of themselves 
naturally, and what by the personall existence of a Planet in any of them. 

Sixthly, that he be ready in the, shape and description which every Planet 
designes, and how to vary their shape as they are posited in Sign and house, or 
aspected of the MOON or any other Planet. 

Seventhly, he must of t read the termes of Art, and have them fresh in his 
mene: and especially the twentieth and one and twentieth Chapters of the first 


lf God ee shall preserve my life, | may therefore adde many things, and 
much light unto this Art, and therefore | desire the Students herein, that If they meet 
with any extraordinary casualty in their practice, they would communicate it unto me. 

| have with all uprightness and sincerity of heart, plainly and honestly delivered 
the Art, and have omitted nothing willingly, which | esteemed convenient or fit, or 
what might any thing assist the young Students herein; | have refused the Methods of 
all former Authors, and framed this DE NOVO, which | have ever found so easie and 
successful, that as yet | never undertook the instruction of any, whom | have not 
abundantly satisfied, and made very capable of the Art, in less time than any could 
expect; for although | am not yet six and forty years of age compleat, and have 
studied this Science but since 1632. and have lived six years since that in the 
Country, yet | know | have made more Schollers in this Profession, than all that 
professe this Art in England. It remalnes, that | give every Author his due, and deale 
plainly, unto which of them | am engaged for such matter as they have assisted me 
with in the Introductory part: verily the Method is my own, it’s no translation; yet | 
have conferred my own notes with Darion, Bonatus, Ptolomey, Haly, Etzler, 
Dietericus, Naibod, Hasfurtus, Zael, Tanstettor, Agrippa, Ferriers, Duret, Maginius, 
Origanus, Argol. 


The second part of this Treatise judging of horary Questions, is very large, and 
far beyond my first intentions, hath exceeded its just proportion: In building this Work 
| advised with Bonatus, Haly, Dariot, Leupoldus, Pontanus, Avenezra, Zael: | 
examined the 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


Manuscripts of Ancient and Reverend Professors in this Art, who lived more remote 
from these corrupt Times, (for unto the vulgar Professors now residing in this City, 
am | noways engaged;) and though it was not small trouble unto me, to see the 
discrepency of judgment amongst them and the more ancient printed Authors, yet | 
have with some trouble reconciled their disagreements, and reformed and corrected 
what might have led the Reader into an errour: for indeed the Writings of our Fore— 
fathers in the Language they did deliver their minds in, was sound and solid, but the 
simplicity of such as undertook their translations was much and did beget mistakes, 
whilest ey endeavouring to translate the Authors into Latin, or any other Language 
they thought fit; did not understand the Art or the Termes thereof; so that of those 
their Labours; they rendered an ill accompt unto Posterity, as any may see in the 
translation of that we call the ‘Judicium’ in Novem Judiclis.,&c. and In other pieces of 
Alkindus, one whereof lately a learned Gentleman gave me, guilty of the same 
deficiency In the translation. 

In this second Book | have omitted nothing which | could devise to be 
helpful, and if my own may of judicature please any, it being somewhat different from 
that of the Ancients, he may in many Chapters make use of it. | have illustrated every 
house with one or more figures, and therein shewed the method of judgment, which | 
held very convenient for Learners, it being my whole intention to advance this Art, 
and make even a slender wit capable hereof. 


You may in the third Book behold the entire Art of Nativities, | have made it 
plain and significant: part of the Method, and much of the matter | had from Leovitius, 
who was the first that methodized the Art of Nativities, before his time extremealy 
defective in that point; where he was not copious, | supplyed my self, or enlarged 
from Origanus; Junctine, Pezelius, Naibod, Cardan, Garceus, Schonerus, Albubater, 
Montulmo, Judeus, Ptolomey, Lindholt: Perhaps some will accuse me for dissenting 
from Ptolomey; | confesse | have done so, and that | am not the first, or shall | have 
done so, be the last; for |an more led by reason and experience, then by the single 
authority of any one man, &c. | have inserted many judgments 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


of my own, | could have added many more: but who am I? being all errour, that | 
could have contradict the sayings of so many wise men, whose learnings and pains | 
so much esteem and reverence. 

Little did | think this Work of Nativities would have swollen to so great a 
bulk; | assure you it exceeds my first intentions: the pains however hath been mine, 
and notwithstanding the importunities of some, and they not a few, who desired | 
should not deliver the Art in so plain and easie a method; yet | professe, their words 
rather invited me to discover all | knew, then to conceale one sillable material. 

Had | respected my own private lucre, | need not have wrote at all; who 

could have compelled me? my own fortune is competent: but this thing we call the 
publick good, was ever, and shall be my maxime to guide me in such like actions: 
how shall | myself expect truth in any Author, if | myself, being an Author, play the 
knave in the same kind: Quod non vis tibi, ne facias alteri. 
This Art of Astrology hath many more parts in it then at this present time | have 
handled, or indeed as yet have liesure to do; yet | know I.t will be expected | should 
have wrote of Elections, of the Effects of the greater and lesser Conjunctions of the 
Planets, of Eclipses, Comets, prodigious Apparitions, the variation and inclination of 
the Weather, Degeneralibus Accidentibus Mundi, and by the ingresse of the Sun into 
Aries, of every years particular Fate, of Monethly Observations, &c. Verily such things 
as these may justly be required at my hands; for unto God be the glory, they are all in 
a large measure known unto me, and | can perform them all, blessed be his name 
therefore: But as for Elections, me thinks he can be no ingenious Astrologian, that 
having studied or well entred into this my book shall not be able (ad libitum) to frame 
his own Figure of Elections, let the quere be what It will. 

He that shall read my Discourse upon the Conjunctions of Saturn and 
Jupiter, may make himself capable to write of the Major and Minor Conjunctions; | 
had no president for that, but wrought it out of the fire, at what time | had great 
leasure. | do write Annually of Eclipses, as they happen in the year, of prodigious 
Appearances twice | have Astrologically wrote, both times to good purpose, so did 
never any before that | read of. 

Of Commets | have had no occasion as yet, but somewhat | began in 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


that Tract of the Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, wherein | a little treated of the 
Commet in 1618. Posterity may know by that little, wnat Method | hold fittest to be 
followed, in that kind of judgment. Of Weather, the knowledge thereof is so vulgar, 
ee withall the true Key so different, it requires a longtime of experience; and besides, 

aster Booker hath promised to undertake that burthen; and indeed, he is onely able 
of all the English Nation | know to perform it: | have great hopes of Master Vincent 
Wing, but he is yet more Mathematicall then Astrologicall; there may be many private 
men of great judgment therein, but its my unhappinesse | know them not. 

Annuall and Monthly Judgments | have not yet digested into a Method, | 
hope to live and perform it; | am the first of men that ever adventured upon Monthely 
Observations in such plain language, yet it is my harty desire to communicate 
hereafter what ever | know unto Posterity. Having been of late traduced by some 
halfwitted fools, | deliver myself to Posterity who | am, and of what profession; | was 
born at Diseworth in Leicestershire May 1602. in an obscure Village, and bred a 
Grammer Scholler at Ashby, and intended for Cambridge, &c. 1618 and 1619: my 
Father decayed his Estate so much, that he was not capable of sending me thither; 
those two years | lived in some penury and discontent; in 1620. an Atturney sent me 
up unto London to wait on a Gentleman, one Gilbert Wright, who lived and dyed In 
the House | now live In; he never was of any profession, but had sometimes attended 
the Lord Chancellour Egerton, and then lived privately. 1624, his wife dyed of a 
Cancer In her left brest, 1625. | lived in London where | now do, during all that great 
sicknesse, God be praised | had it not. February 1626, my Master married again, he 
dyed May 22, 1627, having before settled ee per annum of me during my 
life, which to this day | thank God | enjoy; nor did | ever live so freely as when | was 
his servant. Ere the year 1627, was quite run out, my Mistris was pleased to accept 
of me for her husband. During some years of her life | passed my time privately and 
with much obscurity, yet we lived exceeding loving together; but In 1632, | was 
strangely affected to Astrology, and desirous to Study it, onely to see if there were 
any verity in it, there being at that time some Impostors, that set out Bils publiquely 
what they could do. | met with a Master | confesse, but such a one, as of all 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


was the verriest Knave: This gave me small encouragement; after six weeks | cast 
him off, nor to this day do we converse together. | was then forced to study hard, for 
rather then to intangle myself with another coxcombe, | was resolved to lay all aside; 
but by diligence and hard study, and many times conference with some as ignorant 
as myself, | at last became capable of knowing truth from falshood, and perceived the 
vulgar Astrologer that meerly lived of the Art, was a Knave. 

In September 1633, my wife dyed, not Knowing anyone in the world that 
had affinity unto her; she left me a competent fortune; and this | shall aquaint 
Posterity with, that having some Lands to dispose of, rather then she would suffer me 
to be at twenty Nobles charges to convey It unto me, she gave me the whole money, 
and sold it for 200 pounds. 

In November 1634, | married again. In 1635, | was oppressed with the 

Hypocondryack Melancholly so sorely, that | was enforced to leave London, and 
removed into Surrey 1636, where until September 1641, | lived amongst such whom | 
may name the most rurall of all men living. | then came for London, staggering In my 
judgment in point of Church-government; and knowing that it Is necessary, | ever 
loved Monarchy, but still thought without a Parliment preserved in their just rights, it 
would vanish to nothing. | was nothing known then, or taken notice of by any; time 
produced me acquaintance, and amongst these a good Lady in 1643, about 
February, desired | would give judgment upon a most noble Gentlemans Urine a 
Councellor at Law, who then was not well; | consented, the Urine was brought, my 
judgment returned; | visited him, whom | no sooner beheld, but | Knew there was 
aboundance of gallantry in the man; for indeed he is all Gentleman and a friend in 
very great earnest; my visit of him was the happiest day | ever saw in my whole life; 
for by his alone generosity and countenance, | am what | am, and Astrology is in 
despight of her enemies restored, and must call him her Restaurator. 
Being by his goodness admitted to visit him, | presented him with a small Manuscript 
of my Astrologicall Judgment of the yeer 1644, wherein | was free in delivering my 
opinion modestly of that yeers affaires: it pleased him to communicate it, copies were 
obtained and dispersed; so that by his alone commendation of that poor Manuscript 
unto his private friends, this noble Art at first had respect amongst our 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


Worthies in the Parliment; since which time, the Judicious of the whole Kingdom had 
it in a better esteem; therefore let his name live unto Posterity In an honorable 
esteem, that upon so slender acquaintance with the Author, with the Art, hath been 
so advantagious unto both. 

The Errataes perhaps are many, | desire the Student to correct them before he enter 
upon the Discourse; | wish they were lesse; but in a work of this nature, it’s 
Impossible. 

All the Curtesies which either the Authors precedent to this Age, or at present living, 
have afforded me, | verily believe | have mentioned: | am heartily sorry if | have 
committed any errours, or ommitted any corrections. 


Corner house over against 
Strand-bridge, August 
21, 1647. 


WILLIAM LILLY. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


To his honored Friend the AUTHOR. 


hat ! Persian, Caldee, Arabick, the Greek, 

Latin Astrologers, all taught to speak 
In English ! Trismegiscus, Hercules, 
Pythagoras, Thales, Archimedes, 
Great Ptolomy, and Julius Firmicus, 
Albumazar, and Albategnius, 
Hali, Bonatus, our own Eschuidus, 
And lohn de Regiomonte, Ganivetus, 
Risse, Leovitius, Michael Nostradame, 
Cardan, and Nabod, Ticho, men of fame; 
All these, and more, are dead, all learned Men; 
Were they alive, they might come learn again. 
But are they dead? Behold Astrology, 
Now Pha’nix like, reviv'd again in thee | 
Questions resolv d, Nativities, Directions, 
Transites, with Revolutions and Protections; 
Saturn must lay his sullen prankes aside, 
And Mars his madness, lest he be decride; 
Venus her lusts; his thefts must Mercury; 
Sol his ambition; Love his jollity: 
Luna her fickle and unconstant motion, 
Is now notorious to each vulgar notion. 
Aske what you will, Would you resolved be? 
Observe your time, learn your Nativity: 
Were Picus, Chambers, Perkins, Melton, Geree, 
Vicars, to write again, all men would jeer yee. 
You durst not let us know when you were born, 
Your ignorance Is brought to publick scorn: 
Our Latin Lilly is for Boyes are young; 
Our English Lilly is for Men more strong. 
The Sybils Books were burnt, they are all gone; 
| will preserve my choyce, This is that one: 
Be you for or against, or will ye, nill ye; 
I'm for the Art, and th’ Author William Lilly. 


John Booker. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


UPON THE LEARNED WORK OF THE 
AUTHOR. 


ehold Urania with a Lilly deckt, 
Presents her self to Englands gracious view. 
Let Envies square, or opposite aspect 
Not dare at her a frowning look to shew; 
Let it be said, for such ungratefull scornes, 
A Lilly late hath sprung among the thornes. 


WILL. ROE. 


TO THE READER OF CHRISTIAN 
ASTROLOGY. 


W onder you may ! the volumes of the Skye 

| nour own Characters you here decry. 

L una and Hermes, Venus and the great 

L ight of the World, and Mars in English treat 

| ove and old Saturn; they their influence send; 
A nd their Conjunctions in our Tongue are penn’d 
M ay not Apollo then, the sacred Bayes 

L et fall upon his head, who casts their Rayes 

| nto the language of our Albion quill? 

L oe! he hath taught great Ptolom’s secret skill. 
L earning, that once in brazen piles did stand, 

Y ou now may see is Printed in our Land. 


R.L. in Med. Studens & Philo-Mathemat. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


ON THIS UNPARALELLED PEECE OF ART. 


Nc to commend the Author, ‘tis the least 
Of all my thoughts, this Work will do it best; 
Nor yet to vex the prying Readers fence 
With bumbast words instead of Eloquence, 
Do | crowd in these rude unpolisht lines: 
But rather to inform the giddy times 
How much they are his Debtors; what they owe 
To him, whose Labours freely doth bestow 
On them his Art, his paines, his poercing sight, 
His lampe of life, to give their darknese light. 
Tis now acrime, and quite grown out of fashion, 
Tincourage Art amongst the English Nation. 
Tell them of it, or Natures mysteries, 
Tush, cry they:Ignorance they idolize. 
The glorious Stars, they think God doth not use them 
To do his will: Lord! how do men abuse them? 
Nor will allow the Planets to fulfill 
(As instruments) Gods high decree or will. 
Nay, some there are, though letter wise, they can 
Not yet beleeve that all was made for Man. 
Barke black-mouth’d Enwy; carpe at what’s well done, 
This Book shall be my choyce companion. 


WW. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


UPON THIS WORK. 


he Author's God, Composer and the Setter 
Of all his works, and therein every letter. 
Heaven is his Book; the Stars both great and small 
Are letters Nonperill and Capitall 
Disperst throughout; therein our learnings dull, 
In this thy Work it is compleat and full: 
Could man compose or set Heavens letters right 
He would, like Printing, bring to publick sight 
All what was done, nay what was thought upon; 
For by this way, | see it may be done. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


THE CONTENTS OF THE THREE BOOKS. 


The First Book. 


Page # 
BOs wieema te The number of Planets, Signes, Aspects, with their severall names 
and characters. 
tL eee ee Of the use of the Ephemeris. 
<1) eee eee The right hand page of the Ephemeris unfolded. 
SS ae eae How to erect a figure of Heaven by the Ephemeris and Table of 
Houses aforesaid. 
42......... Of the daily motion of the Planets, and how to reduce their motion 
to any hour of the day, and to the Meridian or London. 
44......... How to finde the quantity of the hourly motion of any Planet by the 
Table following. 
Ol ein pawae's Of the twelve houses of Heaven, and some names or 
termes of Astrologie. 
5) a ere Of the twelve houses of heaven their nature and 
significations. 
ST dienceane Of the Planet Saturn, and his significations. 
Bl ete xa pegs Of the Planet Jupiter, and his significations. 
Os bbecth geen Of the Planet Mars, and his severall significations. 
2): ee eee Of the Sun, his generall and particular significations. 
F2 ca wecccds Of the Planet Venus, and her severall significations and nature. 
(Ovcneseues Of Mercury, his significations, nature and property. 
0 cub eenaxe Of the Moon, her properties and significations, 
OF ew bx axed Another brief description of the shapes and formes of the Planets. 
OG. cevecade Of the twelve Signes of the Zodiack and their manifold divisions. 
OD deb kw sce The Nature, Place, Countries, generall description and Diseases 
signified by the twelve houses. 
WOO 2 ope cee ke Teaching what use may be made of the former discourse of the 
twelve Signes. 
Oe oe eaeae: Of Essentiall Dignities of the Planets. 
104......... A Table of the Essentiall Dignities of the Planets. 
TO Ge, 2d od ee ed Of severall Termes, Aspects, words of Art, Accidents belonging to 
the Planets, with other necessary rules. 
VOB oad died x A Table of the aspects of the Signes amongst one another. 
TSescee ooad A ready Table whereby to examine the Fortitudes and Debilities of 
the Planets. 
TB ose oh veh soe A Table shewing the masculine and feminine degrees of every 
Sign. 
wl: iearaearaearae ar er A Table shewing what members in mans body every Planet 
signifieth in any of the twelve Signes. 
V2 & ose cacon 5 Considerations before judgment. 
ee What Significator, Querent and Quesited are: An Introduction to 
judgment. 
124 cece aes To know whether a thing demanded will come to passe yea or not. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


THE CONTENTS OF THE SECOND BOOK, CONTAINING THE 


RESOLUTION OF QUESTIONS. 


Questions concerning the First House. 
Page # 


ic ee If the Querent is likely to live long yea or not. Signes of health or long life. 
130....... The time when any accident shall happen. 
132. To what part of heaven it’s best the Querent direct his affai res. 
134.......What part of his life is like to be best. 
AS is fereene An Astrologicall figure judging the former Demands. 
143. .Of the Part of Fortune, and how to take It either by day or night. 
145....... How to examine its fortitudes. 
147....... If one shall finde the party at home one would speak w | th. 
148....... Of a thing suddenly happening, whether It signifie good or ill. 
What marke, mole or scar the Querent hath. 
TET vccese Whether one absent be dead or alive. 
TB 2 cssuse 22 An Astrologicall figure explaining the aforesaid demands. 
TBS vere: A Woman whether her Son were with his Master or not. 
ipo) gener Of a Ship at Sea, her safety or destruction. 
162.0: Example of a ship at sea upon a figure judged. 
ih s\o pepe Example of another ship. 
166....... The time of receiving any Question. 


Judgments concerning the Second House, viz of Riches. 


TGF coxa Whether the Querent shall be rich. 

168 By what means attain Riches. 

es seen The reason or cause why the Querent may not attain a fortune. 

lege meres If the Querent shall obtain the substance he hath lent. 

174....... If one shall acquire his wages or suspend owing him. 

lego acre Of the time when the accidents treated of may happen. 

a eee A Figure resolving the doubts and demands aforesaid. 

184....... Of that Planet or Planets Impediting the effecting or performance of what is 
demanded in every Question. 

186....... If the Querent shall continue rich. 


Of the Third House, Viz of Brethren, Sisters 
Kindred, Short Journeys. 


188....... If the Querent and his brother, Neighbor or sister shall agree. 

189.20. Of a Brother that is absent. 

Oe acces Of Reports, Intelligence or Fears, If true or false, or signifie good or evil. 
bcs ween lf Rumours be true or false. 

194....... Of councell or advice, whether good or evil. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


ub: loaner Whether the Querent have brethern of sisters. Of a short journey, if good 
to go; which way. 

196.....-. .An Astrologicall figure of an absent brother. 

200....... lf Cambridge was taken or no. 


Of the Fourth house, viz. gf Parents, Lands, 
Tenements, Cities, Townes. 


BOE ites To find a thing hid or mislaid. 
1 oe What part of the house or ground. 
204....... Of buying and selling Lands, Houses, Farmes, &c. 
1 Oo anon Of the goodnesse or badnesse of the Land or House. 
206....... Quality of the ground. 
Tenants good or ill. 
If wood on the ground. 
208....... If good to hire or take the Farm or house desired. 
210....... If the Querent shall enjoy the Estate of his Father. 
a nee If good to remove from one house to another. 
214....... Of turning the course of Rivers, &c. 
2D ikiians Of Treasure hid in the ground. 
OP accents If the Querent shall obtain it. 
219 cscs If the Author should purchase some Houses, an Astrological Figure 
thereof. 


Of the Fifth House, and its Questions. 


222.2... If one shall have children. 

22S crxnens If a woman ask whether she may conceive. 

224 vecanes Whether the Querent shall have children, be he man or woman that 
asketh. 

22D wississ If aman shall have children by his Wife, yea or no, or of any other 
Woman whom he nominates. 

226....... Whether she is with child or not. 

228....... If the man ask unknown to the Woman. 


Other Judgments 


22 .ssnins Whether a Woman be with child or not. 

230....... lf a Woman do conceive with child of more then one. If male or female. 

Bo Vesis How long the Woman hath been conceived. Of the time when the birth 
will be. 

232....... Whether the birth shall be by day or night. 

234.......Whether unity is like to be between the Infant and Parents. 

2d Dictuixs Of Embassadours and Messengers. 

as | 6 eee Of a Messenger sent forth upon any errand. 

238....... If the Querent shall ecer have children, a figure judged thereof. 

240....... If one were with child of a male or female; what time she should be 
delivered, a figure thereupon judged. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


Of the Sixth House, and its Questions, viz. of Sickness 
Servants, small Cattle. 


243....... Judgment of sickness by Astrologie. What part of the body afflicted. 
244....... From what cause the sickness is. 
245....... Diseases signified by the Houses. 
Diseases signified by the Signs. 
246....... Diseases of the Planets. 
247... Whether the disease will be long or short. 
248....... Signes of a long or short sickness. 
“aes eee Testimonies that the Querent shall live and not dye of the Infirmity now 
afflicting. 
QOD cacehen Arguments of death. 
2B. ssasess D riot abridged. 
259 .. ncn If the party be sick of whom the question is demanded. Cause of the 
Disease, inward or outward. 

ZOD ceccne Of the quality and nature of the Disease. 
clo eee Whether the Disease be in the right or left side. 
264....... Whether the Disease be In the body, minde, or both. 
266....... Of the Crysis, or dayes criticall. 
ZO tesiad How long ere the sick recover. 
268....... Hermes Trimegistus upon the Decumbiture of the Sick. 
273-281..Of the Signs and conjectures of the Disease, and of 

life and death by the good or ill disposition of the 

MOON at the time of the Patients first lying down. 
282....... Astrologicall Aphorismes judging of sickness. 
286....... A Figure of a sick Doctor, if curable. 
289. cccnns A Figure set to know whether the sick would live or 

dye. 

290....... Of the Crysis in Diseases. 
294....... A Table shewing how to set a figure in sickness of 

sixteen sides. 
296....... If a Servant shall get free from his Master. 


Significations of the Seventh House, viz. of Marriage, 
Enemies, Law-suits, Contracts, Wars, Fugitives, Thefts. 


298.......Aphorismes considerable before judgment. 
302.......Of Marriage. 
303....... More Aphorismes of Marriage by Alkindus. 

Of Marriage whether it shall take effect or not. 
SOF cond Of Marriage. 
305.......What shall be the occasion hindring the Marriage. 

Which love or desire is most. 
307.......Whether aman shall Marry. 

The time of Marriage. 

How many Husbands a Woman shall have. 
308....... From what part one shall Marry. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


What manner of person he or she is. 

Whether a man or woman be more noble. 

Who shall be master of the two. 

309....... Whether she be rich or not. 

Whether the Marriage be legitimate. 

How they shall agree after Marriage. 

Disagree. 
310.......Who shall be cause of their strife. 

That the Marriage shall be broken, and the cause thereof. 
oa bere Whether a man or his Wife shall dye first. Which of the two shall live longest. 
Sg Poe Whether she be a Maid, or chaste. 

Whether a Damosell be a Maid or not. 

Sys eee Whether a woman be honest to her Husband or not. 

Of a Woman whether she hath a Lover besides her Husband. 
314.......Whether a Woman is honest. 

Whether a woman trades with any but her husband. 
316.......lf ones Sweet-heart have a Lover besides himself. Hath she a Lover. 
ou eee If a Marriage shall be perfected or not. 
318.......Whether the child conceived is the Son of the reputed Father. 

Whether a woman living from her husband, shall be received into favor, or 

live with him again. 
Sale aeere Of Servants fled, Beasts strayed, and things lost. 
320....... The place where the thing is that is lost. 
321.......How the Goods were lost. 

Whether the cattle be stolen or not. 

Whether the thing missing fled of it self. 

B28 .sisns Of Beasts strayed, or fugitives 
324.......Of Beasts or strayes. 
325....... That the beasts are lost. 
Dead or alive. 
In pound or not. 

The cattle shall be found again. 

326....... How far off a thing lost is from the Owner. 

Beasts stolen or strayed, in what place which way. 
B27 cesses In what ground. 

The cattle shall to pound and be long in pound. 
328....... Escape the pound. 

Whether the fugitive shall be taken. 

Of MOON in questions of fugitives. 
2D agstics Whether he shall be taken. 

If a Fugitive shall be found or come again. 

330....... Distance of the Fugitive. 

A Woman flying from her Husband. 

Of a thief and theft. 
eo ldiaaies Of the Significator of the Thief. 

The significator of the thing stolen. 
332.......Approved judgments of Theft. 
334....... Whether it be stolen or no. 
ic eee The Goods are stolen. 

Not stolen. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


It will be, or is intended to be stolen. 
It’s lost or stolen.. 
336....... Age of the Thief. 
DOT wesins Of the same. 
Orica, Whether the Thief be nam or woman. 
Ss |S ene If one thief or more. Of the cloaths of the Thief. 
340....... Names of Theeves or men according to Astrologie. 
342....... Whether the Thief be of the house or not. Stranger or familiar. 
343....... Rules by the Lord of the Seventh house. 
344....... Whether the Thief be in the Town or not. 
345....... Distance between the Owner and the Thief. Where the thief is. 
346....... Towards what part the thief is gone. 
347....... Of the house of the Thief, and marks thereof. 
348....... Tokens of the Thlefs house. 
349....... The Goods in the Owners hands. 
Whether the Goods be in the custody of the Thief. 
350....... If he carried all with him. 
Distance of the thing from the Owner. 
S109 pecene Place where the Goods stolen are. 
353....... Lost or stolen, in what part of the house. The form or likeness of the entring 
of the house. 
354....... What is stolen by the Lord of the Second or Tenth house. 
The quality of the Goods stolen. 
io os eee Sign of Recovery. 
If it shall be recovered. 
DOG iicwers In what time It shall be recovered. Asphorisms concerning Recovery. 
358....... The discovery of the Thief, and recovery of the Goods. 
BO sinus Of Theft. 
366....... Whether the Thief shall be known or not. Whether the Thief be suspected of 
the Owner or not. Who did the deed or fact. 
360....... Whether it be the first fact the Thief did. Lillie’s experimental Rules of Theft. 
361....... Of Battle, War, or other contentions. 
BOT cctate If one shall return safe from War, or a dangerous Voyage. 
368....... What will ensue of the War. 
369....... Who shall do best in a Law-suit. 
Of Partnership betwixt two, If it shall be, and who shall do best. 
OP Onerwead Of familiarity betwixt Neighbour and Neighbour. Of removing from place to 
place. 
OT Massie If good to remove or stay in any Town or City. Of Hunting. 
og eee Of a Law—suit or controversie betwixt two, who should do best. 
376....... Of Buying and Selling Commodities. 
TT ccnauis Of Partnership. 
Soi. mere? Whether a city, Town or Castle beseiged shall be taken. 
380....... Of Commanders in Armies, their abilities, fidelity, &c. 
383....... If two Armies shall fight. 
If the Querent have open enemies. 
BOO cto A Figure to know if a Lady should marry the party desired. 
389....... A second figure If the woman should marry the man beloved. 
os | Oe A figure for a fugitive servant. 
oS eee A figure for a Dog missing. 
<\° Money lost, who stole it, a figure thereupon. 
OT Ankax Fish stolen, a figure for it. 
|S ieee A figure to know If Sir William Waller and Sir Ralph Hopton were engaged. 
401....... A figure to know if the Earle of Essex should take Reading. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


Of the Eighth House, viz. 
Death, Dowrev, &c. 


404....... If the absent party be alive or dead. 
406....... Whether one absent will return. 
407....... The time when he will return. 
408....... Of the death of the Querent, or space of his own life. 
409....... When or about what time the Querent may dye. 
411....... Whether the Man or Wife shall dye first. 
412....... What manner of death the Querent shall dye. 
Whether the portion of the wife will be great, or easily obtained, or if the 
woman will be rich. 
414....... If one be afraid of a thing, whether he shall be in danger thereof or not. 
415....... A figure to know whether man or woman shall dye first. 
417....... A figure of a womans to know if her husband at Sea were alive or dead. 
419....... A figure to know what manner of death Canterbury should dye. 
421....... A figure to know If the Querent should have the Portion promised. 


Of the Ninth House, viz. Long Journeys, 
Religion, Dreams. 


422....... Of a voyage by Sea, and successe thereof. 
423....... What wind he will have. 
Of him that taketh a journey. 
424....... Of the short or slow return of him that taketh a journey. 
425....... When he shall return that is gone a long journey. 
428....... The cause of a Journey, and successe thereof. Successe and length thereof. 
429....... If one shall profit by his knowledge, &c. in Chymistry or Chyrurgery. 
431....... Of ones Science or wisdom whether it be true. 
Of many persons travelling, in what condition they are. 
432....... To what part of Heaven the Traveller had best direct 
his Journey. 
If the person shall obtain a good Benefice. 
MSA tcsanes Of Dreams whether they signifie anything or not. 
436....... A figure adjusted concerning Dreams. 
437....... A figure to know If one should obtain a Parsonage. 
439....... A figure erected to know if Presbytery shall stand. 
442....... A figure to know If the Querent should obtain the Phy 1 osophers Stone. 


Of the Tenth House, viz. of Government, Dignity, 
Office, Command. 


444....... If the Querent shall obtain the Office desired or not. 

447....... If one shall continue in the Command or Office he is In. 

448....... Whether a King expulsed his Kingdom, or an Officer removed from his Office, 
shall return to the Kingdom or Office, or not. 

450....... Of the Profession or Trade any one is capable of. 

452....... If Prince Rupert should get honour by our wars, a figure thereof. 

453....... lf he should worst the E. of Essex. 

454......What should become of him. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


.If his Majesty should procure Forces out of Ireland to harm the Parliment, a 
figure thereupon, and judgment delivered. 

If the Queen then in the North, would advance with her Army; if she would 
prosper; when she and his Majesty would meet. 

If attain the Preferment desired. 


Eleventh House, viz. House of Friends, Hope, 
Substance of Kings. 


Of good or ill in questions concerning this house. 
If a Man shall have the Thing hoped for. 
Of the agreeing of Friends. Of love betwixt two. 


Of the Twelfth House, viz. Imprisonment, Great Cattle, Whitchery, 
Private Enemies, Labour, Banished Men. 


Of secret enemies not named. 

To know who a secret enemy is. 

Whether any man committed to prison shall soon be delivered. 

Of the imprisoned. 

If a question be asked for a Captive or Prisoner. Of a Captive or Slave. 
If one be bewitched or not. 


oy Naturall Remedies against witchcraft. 


A figure for a Horse lost. 

A figure to know if one were Bewitched. 

A figure of a Prisoner escaped out of Prison. 

A Lady of her husband in prison, a figure of it. 

A figure upon the Earle of Essex his last going into the west. 
A Table of the Planetary hour. 

To finde out what Planet ruleth any hour of the day or night. 


THE CONTENTS OF THE THIRD BOOK. 


A Table converting hours and minutes of time into degrees and minutes of 
the Equator. 

.A Table of right ascentlons. 

A Table of oblique ascentions for the latitude of 34 degrees. 

A Table of oblique ascentions for the latitude of 49 degrees. 

A Table of oblique ascentions for the latitude of 53 degrees. 

Divers ways of rectifying Nativities. 

Correction of an estimate figure by Trutine of Hermes. 

Rectification of a Nativity by Animodar. 

Rectification by Accidents, the way to frame an Astrological 1 Speculuna. 

A Speculum of a Nativity. 

Characters of the new aspects, the number of the degrees of the aspect. 

Erection of a Scheam by Regiomontanus. 

Things considerable before judgment given upona 

Nativity. 

Of the Space of life, whether the Native shall live 

long or not. 

Of Hylech or Aphaeta, and the Intersicient Planet. 

Of the Lord of the Geniture. 

Of the Complexion, temperment of the body, quality of Planets and Signes. 

Manners of the Native. 

Quality of manners discernable from the Planets. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


543....... Of the understanding of the Native. 

446....... Of the Stature, shape and form of body. 

547....... Nature of the Signes, colour of the Face and Hair. 
549....... Of the grossenesse or leannesse of bodies. 

BOT cute Of the generall fortune or misery of the Native. 


Of the Second House, viz. of Riches 
Or the goods of Fortune 


DOs siietes Whether the Native shall be rich. 

554....... By what meanes the Native shall attain wealth. 

561....... If the Native shall attain his Estate by just or indirect dealing. 
DO vacce If the Estate of the Native shall be durable. 


Judgments upon the Third House. 
564....... Of Kindred, Brethren, Sisters. 


lf have Brethren, Sisters. 
566....... Fortune & condition of Brethren. 
567... Of the unity or concord betwixt the Native and his Brethren. 
568....... Number of Brethren. 


Judgments upon the Fourth House. 
concerning Parents, &c. 


569....... Of the Father. 

BO viceiiens Of the Mother. 

BT 2 vessocs If the Mother had difficult labour at the Native’s Birth. 
If the Native shall enjoy the Estate of his Father. 

3 ks ener Of the mutuall agreement of Parents. 

574....... Of the Parents mutuall love to the Native. 

57D. cccene Significatlons of great fortune out of Mines. 


Of the Sixth House, viz. of Infirmities. 


BC cctv: Of the infirmities of Bodies. 
577... Aphorismes useful for this house. 
D7 Bixcusc: Kinds and qualities of Diseases, how discoverable from the Planets and 
Signes. 
581....... Of weaknesse In the Sight, or casualties portended to the eyes. 
582....... Defects in the Eyes. 
Impediments in the Tongue. 
583....... Of the Tooth-ach. 
Of the falling Sicknesse. 
584....... Of the Stone. 
585....... Of the Gout. 
Of violent Falls. 
Whether the Diseases of the Native are curable or not. 
586....... Of Servants and small Cattle. 


Of the Seventh House. 
a) 2]: ae Of mens Marriages. 
Whether the Native shall marry or not. 


DOS cuss: Signes of Marriage. 
a) 2): eee Whether the Native shall obtain his wife with ease or much difficulty. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


The time of Marriage. 

Of the number of wives. 

From whence, or what quarter the Native shall marry. 
What manner of wife or wives the Native shall have. 
Aphorlsmes concerning the positure of Venus. 

Of the mutual love and concord betwixt man and wife. 
Whether the Native or his wife shall dye first. 

Of the Marriage of women. If the woman shall marry. 

If with difficulty; when; from whence; what manner of man. 
If rich; if agree. 


The Fifth House. 


Of Children. 

Aphorisms concerning this house. 

How many children the Native may have. 
Whether male or female. Aphorisms of Albubater. 


Judgments upon the Ninth House, viz. 
of Journeys and Religion. 


Whether the Native shall travell or not. 

To what part of the World the Native shall travell. 
Whether travel by land or water. 

The cause of travell. Haly his Aphorismes. 

Of successe in travell. 

What Region or Country will be best to travell into. 
The Religion of the Native. 

Aphorisms belonging thereunto 

Of Dreams. 


Of the Tenth House. 


Of the Honour or Dignity of the Native. Whether the Native shall have 
Preferment or not. 

Rules from the two Luminaries. 

Aphorismes from the Sun. 

Concerning the Moon. Of the Midheaven. 

Of the Ascendant. 

Of the Fixed Stars. 

What manner of Preferment, its quality. 

If the Dignity or Honour shall continue. 

Special Aphorismes concerning that judgment. 

Of the Profession of the Native. 

Experimented Aphorismes concerning the Natives Profession. 

Of Mercury when Lord of the Profession. When joyned with others. 
Of Venus when alone signifies the Profession. When mixed with others. 
Of Mars when significator of the Profession. 

When mixed with others. 

Of Mercury and Venus when commixed. Of Venus with Mars. 

Of Mars and Venus when Significators of Art. 

With what successe the Native shall handle it. 

Quality of the Profession. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


Judgments belonging to the Eleventh House. 


634....... Of Friends. 
CSD wc cense Speciall rules concerning that house. 
636....... Quality of Friends. 
Constancy of Friends. 
637.......Whether there may be untly or concord betwixt two. 
639....... Whether of the Friends is more sincere. 


Of the Twelfth House. 


639.02. Of enemies. 
640....... What manner of enemies, their quality. 
641....... If the Native shall overcome his enemies. 
642.......Whose friendship the Native shall most avoid. 
Of Captivity or Imprisonment. 
644....... Of death, arguments of a violent death. 
645....... The kinds of a violent death. 
646....... From the Sign, from the House the quality of a violent death. 
647....... From Saturn and Mars. 
648....... From the Lord of the Ascendant and Fixed Stars. 


The Effects of Directions. 
654...... .Directions wherefore. 
652....... Effects of Directions. 
653....... What places of Heaven, what Planets Directed, and for what. 
654....... How long the effects of a Direction last. 
656....... ae Ascendant its signification, when directed to the body, term or aspect of 
aturn. 
ODT seiaans The Ascendant directed to the Terms, body or aspect of Jupiter. 
B59. atc: To the body, Terms or other aspect of Mars. 
660....... To the body or other aspect of Sun. 
661....... To the body, Term or aspect of Venus. 
662....... To the body, Term or any aspect of Mercury. 
663....... To the Conjunction, Sextile, Trine, Square or Opposition of Moon. 
665....... To the North Node, South Node or to Part of Fortune, or cusp of the 2nd, 3rd 
or 


4th house. 
666-667..To severall Fixed Stars. 
668....... Mid-heaven directed to Promittors, and the reason why 
directed. 
669....... To the body of Saturn, or his Term, aspect. 
To the body, Term or rayes of Jupiter. 
671....... To the body, Term or severall aspects of Mars. 
B72 iccsn. To the Aspect or Conjunction of Sun. 
673....... To the body, Term, &c. of Venus. 
674....... To the severall aspects or Terms of Mercury. 
B/D eccuse. To the body of Moon or her aspects. 
OY Oras: M.C. to the 11th or 12th house. 
M.C. to severall fixed stars. 
679. .ui0. The Sun directed to Promittors, and wherefore. 
680....... To the body or aspects of Saturn. 
681....... To the aspects or body of Jupiter. 
682....... To the body or aspect of Mars. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


683....... To the body or aspect of Venus. 
685....... To the like of Mercury 
686....... To the like of Moon. 
687-688...To North Node or South Node, or Part of Fortune, or cusp of any of the 
houses. 
689....... The Sun directed to principall fixed stars. 
691....... The Moon directed to Promittors, viz, to Saturn his body or aspect. 
694....... To the body, term or aspect of Jupiter. 
695....... To the aspect, term or body of Mars. 
696....... To the body or aspect of Sun. 
697....... To the body, term or aspect of Venus. 
698....... To the body or aspect of Mercury. 
POO, casa To the North Node, South Node, Part of Fortune, and to the twelve houses. 
701...... .To the fixed stars. 
DOS exits Part of Fortune wherefore directed, its effects when directed to Saturn or his 
aspects. 
704....... To the aspects of Jupiter, Mars and Sun. 
LOB wcciise To the apsects of Venus and Mercury. 
POC ices To Moon and her aspects, to North Node and South Node. 
LOT cxswers To the cusps of the 12 houses. 
708....... Of the measure of time In directions. 
109. cons The first and second way of measuring. 
rae ere The third measure of time, according to Naibod. 
715-716...Of annuall Profections, mersurall and diurnall. 
A oseaan A Table of Profections exactly made. 
718....... The use of Profections and their effects. 
720....... Lord of the Veer, what Planet. 
Pe Migs A Table converting degrees into dayes and hours, &c. 
FES ccuo A Table of the dayes of the yeer, teaching what moneth and day of the 
moneth 
when the Profectionall Significator or other, and the Promittor meets; severall 
examples. 
pgs terme How to judge a figure of Profections. 
yc: meer Judgments upon the Profections of the Ascendant and Moon, their 
signification. 
LD laces What the mid-heaven and Sun signifie. 
Pe vst Signlfication of Part of Fortune. 
734....... Of Revolutions. 
738....... The Return of the Planets to their own places, and of other Planets in a 
Revolution. 
741.0... The transit of the Planets. 
742....... Astrological judgments by way of example upon the 12 houses, and upon 
Directions, Profections, Revolutions and transits, upon a Merchants Nativity. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


JANUARY HATH XXxXI. DAYES 
THE DAILY MOTION OF THE PLANETS AND & 


M|[D|M[_|[A M|[D|M|_|D 
rm ri F ) 


ee 


D 


fl 


48/28 | R | 12| 10 5 
50] 28 6] 10 
52] 27| | 59/11 | 37 
54] 27| | 54[ 12) [23 
56] 27) | 46) 13 9 
58] 27| (40113) [55 
ol27) |34afi4al [at 
227/  |28f15| | 27 
22116] | 17 
6[27) | 17/17 0 
Qf27/_|1ifi7l__ [43 
11] 27 6[ 18) | 32] 2 
14 
17 5| 4 
20 20, | 51 
23 37| 6 
26 22 2 
29 10 
32 23) | 56 
35 43 
39 
43 
46 
50 
BA 
58 


Bo) 
NSN 


NIN = 
< \st 


No} Po} pop 
NI NINN 


— 


POIPOTD | POTD] PO 
©O | CO} CO| CO} CO| CO 
IN 
ine) 

NS 


= 
1 
4 
6 
8 
9 


o1 


7 
1 
7 
1 
7 
1 
7 
1 


O}O}] CO}/NI} D/O1f Bi GP} 


Ol] | GTP |— 


N 
ol 
oO 
ine) 


NO] DMPRM MPM DTM! MPM PLM PPP] Pp 
©0| OOF CO| CO} CO| CO] CO| CO] CO/| CO] GO| CO] CO| 00 


ye) 
{e)) 


Pee ee eco e eer eee ere) 1 | 


ine) 
pe) 
(op) 
IN 
ol 


6} 26 
11 
15 


ine) 
tL) 


oO|oO|—+ 


S 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


JANUARY 1646 


The Lunar Aspects. The Planets 
y) 4 of © Mutuall 
Aspects 
Occid. Occid. Orient. 
¥ 0 
x db ¥ 21 
» Apog. 
[Eclip. © 
VcO%SSA 
9 
0nOs8 IV 


of 


23 


2 
7 


—_— 
a | 


re 
5 
m 
fe) 
| 

a 
= 
@ 
x 


2 
S) 


N 
O1 


¥&% OY 


SS 9 ¥ )D Perig 
o4 9 22 


SSb 9) 2 
Eclip. totall 
Vo 4+ o& 


O 
1 


PETE ET 
~N = ho 


‘ 
S 


O 
ie) 
cf 


> 
© 


@ eo 
EET 


2 
15 
15 


19 


oe 
A 
Oo 
x 13 
of 
* 
oO 


23 


19J0 > FIQO d 


Orient © 917 
1 
— 


11 


USE 
Ee ee 
eet 
oe 
SAE 
a 
ae 
FH 


el 8 


http://www. worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52.DEGREES. 
10 House/11 House|12 House] 1 House | 2 House | 3 House 


yi 


O}O} CO|N || Oo; & 


a/2/2/-/3/4/4/4-/-| =/43/4=|/-| = |D[D/D|ID|[DJD|D/D|D[D/G/ O[D|O|O/oJo}" 


DLO lOO lOO l|Ol|Ol|O| O/O|Ol[Ol[O[OlO/Ol[O/O/O/O/Ol|O/O|O| O|O|O/ O|O/|@ 


oO 
o|on|on| a [oo |no [ro] |o| 3 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52.DEGREES. 
10 House/11 House|12 House} 1 House | 2 House | 3 House 


© |0O|N |} O1;/ | Go| PO|+|O 


DLO lOO [OO s/O/OlO/Ol[ O/O/O| O/Ol/O/Ol[O/O/ O/O/O/O/O[O/O|O| OJO|O/|O 


, 
1 
{ 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
2 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 
3 


NI] || 01} B | Go | Go] PO || + 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52. DEGREES. 
Qin x | 10 House|11 House|/12 House| 1 House | 2 House | 3 House 


DLO /OlLO/O/O lOO lO/O/ OlOs/O/Ol[O|Ol[Ol/O/OJ/OlOl[O}] O/O/O/O/O/ O|O|O|O 


3 
3 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
4 
5 
5 
5 
5 
5 
3) 
a 
o 
5 
5 
) 
5 
5 
6 


(o) 
wi|Nilolon| ala loon |lo|S 


O}OO| NiO} O1) | BRIG | PO] 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52. DEGREES. 
10 House | 11 House | 12 House | 1 House | 2 House | 3 House 


6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
6 
7 
fi 
z 
7 
rf 
7 
Z 
y 
ri 
7 
rj 
rs 
7 
Z 
8 
8 
8 


D(O] O]O JO} O/O] O/Os/O[O|O[O/O/O/O/Oj[O/O| OOO s/O/O|O/O/O|O;O|O|O@ 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52. DEGREES 


10 House | 11 House | 12 House | 1 House 2 House | 3 House 


OlLO | OlO|O/Ol[O/Ol[O|O|O[O/Ol|O/OlO/O/O|O/OlLO/Ol|O|O/O|O/O|O|O|O/|O 


NUN | | 07) BB [Go [Po] | 


ls | ee | eh | el 
oo|po| = |— 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52. DEGREES. 
10 House | 11 House | 12 House | 1 House | 2House | 3 House 


D/L O}/O]O | OC] OlOs/O/OslOl[OjlO/O/O/O] O/O/O}/O/O | O/OJO/O/Os|O/O|O|@|O@/|@ 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52. DEGREES. 


10 House | 11 House | 12 House | 1 House | 2House | 3 House 


. 


© |0O|N | O)|O1| B/G |PO/ + |O 


O}O}00|N | Ni} O71} 01; & | B/G] PO 
© |}0O|N | GO} O01; &/ Go | PO} [+ 


D/O [OO /O]/O | D/O /Os/Ol[Oj[O/O|O/O/O/O[O/O/ OO} OsO/O| D/O /O|O|@|O/|@ 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52. DEGREES. 
10 House | 11 House | 12 House | 1 House | 2House | 3 House 


e 


CO |OO/OCO|N | D|D|oaj& 


OLO OOOO l|O/OlO/Os/Ol/O| O/O/Ol[O[Os/O/OsO/O/O/O/Ol/O/Oj[O| O/O|O|O 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52. DEGREES 


10 House 


11 House 


12 House 


1 House 


2 House 


3 House 


OLOlOLOlOlO/O/O/O/Ol/O]| OO] O] OC] OJFO [OO lO/OlO|Os/O/Ol[O/Ol[O| O/O| O|O 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52. DEGREES 


10 House | 11 House | 12 House | 1 House 2 House | 3 House 


ry 


© | CO|N/O)/01| B/G | Po|— | © 


OlO | OlLO|O/Ol/O/OlLO|Ol/O/O[O/O[O| OO] O|O|Ol|O/O[O/O[O|O/| O|O|O|O/|O@ 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52. DEGREES 
10 House 11 House | 12 House | 1 House 2 House 3 House 


OLO}] OlO/ OO} OD} O/O/O/[O/O[O}| O/Oj{O/O| O/O/O/O/O}| O/OJO|Ol/O|O/@O|O|@ 


—|O | O/}0/CO|N | | or; BR] Bi G|Po| 


—_—)— 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


A TABLE OF HOUSES FOR THE LATITUDE OF 52. DEGREES 
10 House 11 House | 12 House | 1 House 2 House 3 House 


N/R 


co|00|NI] mon} A [po] =| A [NI 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


25 


AN 
INTRODUCTION 
TO ASTROLOGY. 


CHAPTER I. 


The Number of Planets, Signes, Aspects, with 
their Severall Names and Characters. 

n the first place you must know that there are seven planets, so called and 
| charactered. 
Saturn >, Jupiter 4, Mars o&%, Sol ©, Venus ¢, Mercury ¥,Luna ): There is also 
the Head of the Dragon, this noted: 2; and the Tayle U. 2 and WU are not Planets 
but Nodes. 
There be also twelve Signes: Aries VY, Taurus 3, Gemini 1, Cancers @, Leo Q, 
Virgo mp, Libra 2, Scorpio M,, Sagittarius #, Capricornus 6, Aquarius aw, Pisces 
%*: Through these twelve sires the Planets continually move, and can perfectly 


distinguish the character of every Planet and signe, before you proceed to any part of 
this study; and also the characters of these Aspects that follow, viz. * O A °&o. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


26 


You must know, every Signe containes in longitude thirty degrees, and every degree 
sixty minutes, &c. the beginning is from Aries, and so in order one Signe after 
another: so the whole Zodiack containes 360. degrees, the second degree of Taurus 
is the two and thirtieth degree of the Zodiack, the tenth of Taurus is the fortieth, and 
so in order all throughout the twelve signes; yet you must ever account the Aspects 
from the degree of the Zodiack wherein the Planet is, as if Saturn be in ten degrees 
of Gemini, and | would know to what degree of the Ecliptick he casteth his sinister 
Sextile Aspect; reckoning from Aries to the 10th degree of Gemini, | find Saturn to be 
in the 70th degree of the Zodiack, according to his longitude; if | adde 60 degrees 
more to 70, they make 130, which answers to the 10th degree of the Signe Leo, to 
which Saturn casteth his Sextile Apsect, or to any Planet in that degree. 


When two Planets are equally distant one from each other, 60 degrees, we say they 
are in Sextile Apsect, and note it with this character x. 


When two Planets are 90 degrees distant one from another, we call that Aspect a 
Quartill (Square) Aspect, and write it thus, O. 


When two Planets are 120 degrees distant, we say they are in Trine Aspect, and we 
write it thus A. 


When two Planets are 180 degrees distant, we call that Aspect Opposition, and 
character the Aspect thus 0°. 


When two planets are in one and the same degree and minute of any signe, we say 
they are in Conjunction, and write it thus &. 


So then if you find Saturn in the 1st degree of Aries, and Moon or any other Planet in 
the 1st degree of Gemini, you shall say they are in a Sextile Aspect, for they are 
distant one from another 60 degrees, and this Aspect is indifferent good. 

lf Saturn or any other Planet be in the 1st degree of Aries, and another Planet in the 


1st degree of Cancer, you must say they are in a Square Aspect, because there is 90 
degrees of the Zodiack betwixt them: this Aspect is of enmity and not good. 


If Saturn be in the 1st degree of Aries, and any Planet in the first 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


27 


degree of Leo, there being now the distance of 120 degrees, they behold each other 
with a Trine Aspect; and this doth denote Unity, Concord and Friendship. 


If you find Saturn in the 1st degree of Aries, and any Planet In the 1st degree of 
Libra, they being now 180 degrees each from other, are said to be in Opposition: A 
bad Aspect: and you must be mindfull to know what signes are opposite each to 
other, for without it you cannot erect the Figure. 


When Saturn is in the 1st degree of Aries, and any Planet is in the same degree, they 


are then said to be in Conjunction: And this Aspect is good or ill, according to the 
nature of the question demanded. 


Signes Opposite to one another are 


Aries Libra Taurus Scorpio 
Gemini Sagittarius Cancer Capricorn 
Leo Aquarius Virgo Pisces 


That is Aries is opposite to Libra, and Libra to Aries; Taurus to Scorpio, Scorpio to 
Taurus: and so in order as they stand. 


Ephemeris, what, and its use. 


| would have all men well and readily apprehend what precedes, and then they will 
most easily understand the Ephemeris; which is no other thing, then a book 
containing the true places of the Planets, in degrees and minutes, in every of the 12 
signes both in longitude and latitude, every day of the yeer at noon, and every hour 
of the day, by correction and equation. 


| have inserted an Ephemeris of the moneth of January 1646, and after it a Table of 
Houses for the latitude of 52 degrees, which will serve in a manner, all the Kingdom 
of England on this side of Newark upon Trent, without sensible errour; and this | have 
done of purpose to teach by them, the use of an Ephemeris, and the manner and 


means of erecting a Figure of Heaven, without which nothing can be known or made 
use of in Astrology. 


CHAP. Il. 


Of the Use of the Ephemeris. 


a fs first line on the left-hand page, tels you, January hath 31: dayes. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


28 


In the second line you find, The daily motions of the Planets and the Dragons head. 


In the third line and over the character of Saturn you have M.D.M. signifying 
Meridlonall, D. Descending; that is, Saturn hath Meridionall latitude, and is 
Descending. 


In the next column you find M.D. and underneath Jupiter; that is, Jupiter hath South 
or Meridionall latitude, and is descending. 


In the third column you find M.A. and under those letters Mars; that is, Mars hath 
Meridionall latitude, and is ascending. 


The Sun hath never any latitude. 


In the next column to the Sun you find Venus and then Mercury, with the title of their 
Latitude: Now if over any of the Planets you find S.A. or D. it tels you that Planet hath 
Septentrionall or North latitude, and is either ascending or descending, as the letters 
A. or D. do manifest. 


In the fourth line you see Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Mercury, Moon, North Node; 
now you must observe ever, the South Node is in the opposite signe and degree to 
the North Node, though he is never placed in the Ephemeris. 


In the Fifth line you have Aries, Gemini, Capricorn, Capricorn, Pisces, Aquarius, 
Scorpio, Leo: Over Aries you have Saturn, that is to acquaint you, that Saturn is in 
the signe of Aries: And so over Capricorn stands Mars: And so of all rest one after 
another. 


In the Sixth line you have figure 1, telling of you it’s the first day of January, and so 
underneath it to the lower end, you have the day of the moneth. 


Next to the Figure 1, you have the letter A, which Is the letter of the day of the week; 
and if you run down under that column; you see the great letter to be D, which is the 
Sunday or Dominicall letter of the yeer 1646. 


Over against the first day of January under the character of Saturn you find 27.48, 
over those figures you see Aries; the meaning is, Saturn is the first day of January in 
27 degrees and S minutes of Aries: now you must observe, 60 minutes make one 
degree, and that when any Planet hath passed 30 degrees in a signe, he goeth 
orderly into the next; as out of Aries into Taurus, out of Taurus into Gemini, &c. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


29 


In the fourth column, over against the first of the moneth, you find 28R12, over them 
Gemini, and over it Jupiter: that us; Jupiter the first of January is in 28 degrees of 
Gemini and 12 minutes: The letter R tels you that he is Retrograde; had you found Di. 
or D. it had told you he was then come to be Direct in motion. Of all these termes 
hereafter by themselves. 


In the fifth column you find 10,5, over those figures Capricorn, Mars, viz. Mars is the 
first of January in the 10th degree and 5 minutes of Capricorn. 


And so by this order you find the Sun to be in 21 degrees, and 34 minutes of 
Capricorn; and Venus in 5 degrees 7 minutes of Pisces; Mercury in 5 degrees and 29 
minutes of Aquarius; the Moon in 21 degrees and 23 minutes of Scorpio, North Node 
In 12 degrees and 34 minutes of Leo. 


So that you see on the left-hand page, there are ten severall columns; the first 
containing the day of the moneth; the second, the week-day letter; the third, the 
degree and minutes of Saturn; the fourth containes the degrees and minutes Jupiter 
is in; and so every column the like for the rest of the Planets. 


Over against the tenth of January, under the column of the Sun, you find 0 Aquarius 
44 minutes, which onely sheweth you the Sun to be that day at Noon, in 0 degrees 
and 44 minutes of Aquarius, &c. 


In the lower end of the left-side page, after the 31 of January you find Lat. of Pla. that 
is, the Latitude of the Planets. 


Under the letter c you find 1 10 20. 


Under the column of Saturn over against 1, you find 2. 31. then continuing your eye, 
you have upder Jupiter 0, 5: under Mars 0,47; under Venus 1,13; under Mercury 
1,45. The meaning here is, that the first day of January Saturn hath 2 degr: and 31 
min: of latitude; Jupiter 0 degr: 5 min: Mars 0 degr:47 min: Venus | degr: 13 min: 
Mercury 1 degr:45 min: of latitude. To Know whether It is North or South, cast your 
eye to the upper column, and you may see over the character of Saturn stands M.D. 
that is, Meridionall Descending, or South latitude; where you find 5, it tels you the 
latitude is North; if you find A, the planet is Ascending in his latitude; if D. then 
Descending. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


30 


CHAP. Ill. 


The right-hand page of the Ephemeris unfolded. 


Te are eight columns: the first contains the days of the moneth; the six next 
containes the manner, quality and name of those Aspects the Moon hath to the 
Planets; as also, the hour of the day or night when they perfectly meet in Aspect; the 
eighth column hath onely those Aspects which Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, 
Mercury make to each other, and the time of the day or night when. 


In the fourth line under Saturn you find Occid. that is, Saturn is Occidentall of the 
Sun, or sets after him; and so of Jupiter, or where you find Occid. it noteth as much. 


Under Mars you find Orient. that is, Mars is Orientall, or riseth before the Sun. And so 
at any time. 


For better understanding the true time when the Moon comes to the Aspect of any 
Planet, you are to observe, that all those that write Eohemerides, compute the motion 
of the Planets for the noon time, or just at twelve: And you must know, we and they 
ever begin our day at Noon, and so reckon 24 hours from the noon of one day to the 
noon of the next, and after this manner you must reckon in the Aspects. As for 
example: 


Over against the first day of January 1646. which is Thursday, and under the column 
appropriate to the Sun, you find * 0. The meaning whereof is, that the Moon is in 
Sextile aspect with the Sun that first day of January at noon, or no hours P.M. or Post 
Men diem. 


Over against Friday the second of January, you find under the column of Venus 0 6. 
and on the right hand side over against the same day, under Mercury * 9. which is 
no more than this, viz, the second day of January at 6 a clock after noon, the Moon 
comes to the Square or Quartill aspect of Venus; and at 9 of clock she meets with the 
sextile of Mercury. 


Over against the sixt day of January, being Tuesday, under Saturn you find 0 14. that 


Is, fourteen hours after noon of that day, the Moon comes to the O of Saturn: now 
you may easily find, that the 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


31 


fourteenth hour after noon on Tuesday, is two of clock in the morning on Wednesday. 


Again, over against the 6 day, under the column of the Sun you find Conjunction 11 
48 which is no more but this, the Moon comes to Conjunction with the Sun at 48 
minutes after eleven of clock at night: Now you must know the Moon her Conjunction 
with the Sun is her change, her next Square after Conjunction with the Sun is the first 
quarter, her Opposition with the Sun is full Moon, her Square after Opposition is her 
last quarter. 


If you understand but this, that thirteen hours Is one of clock the day subsequent, 
fourteen hours two of clock, fifteen hours three of clock in the morning, sixteen is four 
of clock, seventeen hours is five in the morning, eighteen is six of clock, nineteen 
hours is seven of clock, twenty hours is eight in the morning, twenty one hours is nine 
of clock, bleu) two hours after noon is ten of clock the next day, twenty three hours 
after noon is eleven of clock, &c. Now we never say twenty four hours after noon, for 
then it’s just noon, and if we say 00.00. after noon that is just at noon, or then it’s full- 
twelve of clock: Understanding this and you cannot erre. 


In that column under the Planets mutuall Aspects, over against the third of January 
being Saturday, you find * Saturn Jupiter 21 that is Saturn and Jupiter are in aspect 
21 hours after noon of the Saturday; and that is, at nine of clock on the Sunday 
morning following. 


Over against the fourth day hee find Moon Apogaeum, that is, she is then remotest 
from the earth over against the eighteenth day in the outmost column you find Moon 
Perigaeon, that is, the Moon is then nearest unto the earth. 


Over against the twelfth day, in the same outmost column, you find Mercury in Elong. 
Max. it should be Mercury in Maxima Elongatione, or that day Mercury is in his 
greatest elongation or distance from the Sun. 


Over against the sixt of January, you find in the outside column Vc Sun Jupiter SS 
Mars Mercury; that is the Sun and Jupiter are in Quincunx aspect that day; now that 
aspect consisteth of five Signes, or 150 degrees. 


SS is a Semisextil, and tels you, that day Mars and Mercury are in Semisextil to each 
other: this aspect consisteth of 30 degrees. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


32 


Over against the 25 of January, you find in the outmost column O Saturn Mars 11, 
and Q Sun Saturn: The meaning is, that at eleven of clock after noon, Saturn and 
Mars are in Quartill aspect; and that Q Sun Saturn tels you, the Sun and Saturn have 
a Quintill aspect to each other that day: A Quintill consists of two Signes twelve 
degrees, or when Planets are distant 72 degrees from each other: we seldom use 
more aspects then Conjunction, Sextile, Square, Trine, Opposition: to these of late 
one Kepler, a learned man, hath added some new ones, as follow, viz. 


A Semisextill, charactered SS, consisting of 30 degrees. 
A Quintil Q consisting of 72 degrees. 

A Tredecile Td consisting of 108 degrees. 

A Biquintill Bq consisting of 144 degrees. 

A Quincunx Vc consisting of 150 degrees. 


| only acquaint you with these, that finding them any where you may apprehend their 
meaning. 


After those two sides of an Ephemeris, followeth in order, A Table of Houses; for 
without a present Ephemeris and Table of Houses, it’s impossible to instruct you to 
set a Figure, without which we can give no judgment, or perform anything In this Art. 


The use of the Table of Houses. 


As there are twelve Signes in the Zodiack, through which the Sun and all the Planets 
make their daily motion, so are thers as you may see twelve severall great pages; 
and as Aries is the first Signe of the Zodiack, so in the first line of the first great page 
doe you find Sun in Aries; in the second grand page and first line you will find Sun in 
Taurus; In the third page and first line Sun in Gemini; and so in order according to the 
succession of Signes one after another through the twelve pages: By help of these 
Tables we frame a Figure, as | shall now acquaint you. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


33 


CHAP. IV. 


How to Erect a Figure of Heaven by the Ephemeris and 
Table of Houses, aforesaid. 


n the first place you are to draw the Figure thus; and to know that those twelve 

empty spaces are by us called the twelve houses of Heaven, that square in the 
middle is to write the day, yeer, and hour of the day when we set a figure: the first 
house begins ever upon that line where you see the figure 1 placed, the second 
house where you see the figure 2 stand, the third house where you see the figure 3, 
the fourth house begins where you find the figure 4, the fifth house where you see 
the figure 5, the sixth where you see the figure 6, the seventh house where you find 
the figure 7, the eighth house where you find the figure 8, the ninth house where you 
find the figure 9, the tenth house where you find the figure 10, the eleventh house 
where you find the figure 11, the tewlfth house where you find the figure 12: what 
space is contained between the figure 1 to the figure 2, is of the first house, or what 
Planet you shall find to be in that space, you shall say he is in the first house; yet if he 
be within 5 degrees of the Cusp of any house, his vertue shall be assigned to that 
house whose Cusp he is neerest, &c. but of this hereafter. The Cusp or very entrance 
of any house, or first beginning, is upon the line where you see the figures placed; 
upon which line you must ever place the Signe and degree of the Zodiack, as you 
find it in the Table of Houses, as if you 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


34 


find 10 degrees of Aries for the tenth house, you must place the number 10 and 
Signe of Aries upon the line of the tenth house, and that same tenth degree is the 
Cusp or beginning of that house, and so in the rest. 

In erecting or setting your Figure, whether of a Question or Nativity, you are to 
consider these three things. 

First, the yeer, moneth, oe of the week, hour or part of the hour of that a 

Second, to observe in the Ephemeris of that yeer and day the true place of the Sun in 
Signe, degree and minute at noon. 

Thirdly, what hours and minutes In the Table of houses doe answer or stand on the 
left hand against the degree of that Signe the Sun is In the day of the Question; for 
by adding the hour of the day, and hours and minutes answering to the place of the 
Sun, your Figure is made, and this Signe where the Sun is you must always look for 
In the great column under the title of the tenth house, where you find the Sun and 
that Signe together; as if upon any day of the yeer when | set my Figure, the Sun is in 
Aries, then the first great page or side serveth, for there you find Sun in Aries; if the 
Sun be in Taurus, then the second page serveth, and so in order: and as in the 
uppermost line you find Sun In Aries Taurus Gemini, &c. so underneath those 
characters, and under the tenth house, you see 0 1 2 3 456, and so all along to 30 
degrees; so that let the Sun be In what degree he will, you have it exactly to degrees 
in the second lesse column, under the title of the tenth house, If any minutes adhere 
to the place of the Sun as always there doth, If those minutes exceeds thirty, take the 
hours and minutes, adhering to the next greater degree the Sun Is in; if lesse minutes 
then thirty belong to the Sun, take the same you find him with, for you must know it 
breeds no error in an Horary Question. 


Examples by the Figure following. 


| would erect a Figure of Heaven the sixt_of January, being Tuesday, 1646. one hour 
thirty minutes afternoon, or P.M. that is, Post Meridiem. First, | look in the Ephemeris 
over against the sixth of January, for the true place of the Sun, and | find it to be 26 
39 Capricorn; then | look in the Table of Houses untill | find the Sun in Capricorn, 
which | doe in the tenth great page, and under the number 10, which signifieth the 
tenth house, | find 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


35 


Capricorn; | enter with the degrees of the Sun which being 26 39 | look for 27, and on 
the left hand against it, | find 19h 56m; In the head of the Table over them H. H. 
signifying Hours and Minutes: These hours and minutes viz. 19,56, | adde to the time 
of day in my Question, vlz. 1, 30 (and so | must always in every Question adde both 
numbers together, and if they make more then 24 hours, | must cast away 24 hours, 
and enter the Table of Houses, under the title of time from noon, seeking for the 
remainder, or the neerest number to it, and on the right hand over against It, under 
the severall columns, you shall have the Cusps of the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, first, 
second, third, fourth houses: but to my former purpose: | add 19,56 to 1,30 and they 
produce 21 hours, 26 minutes; which number | seek for in that column, entitled Time 
from noon, or Hours, minutes, and which number | find precisely In the eleventh great 
page, under the Sun in Aquarius; and over against 21,26 on the right hand under the 
column of the tenth house, | find 19,[tenth house] and over its head upward, the 
Sine Aquarius, so then | put the 19 degrees of Aquarius upon the Cusp of the 
tenth house. 


[Eleventh house.] In the third column, over against 21,26 | find 17,6, over It the 
Signe of Pisces, above Pisces the number 11, which appoints you 17 degrees, and 6 
minutes of Pisces for the Cusp of the eleventh house. 


[Twelfth house.] In the 4th column you find over against the former number 11,37, 


over that the character of Taurus, at the upper end 12, which tels you, that 11,37 
degrees of Taurus must be placed on the Cusp of the twelfth house. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


36 


[First house.] In the fifth column over against the former number, you have 25,31, 
over It Gemini, over Gemini 1 House, and directs you to place the 25 degrees and 31 
minutes of Gemini upon the line of Cusp of the first house. 


[Second house.] In the sixth column you find 17,10, over that Cancer, 2 House, which 
tels you 17, 10 degrees of the Signe Cancer must be placed on the Cusp or line of 
the second house. 


[Third house.] In the seventh little column over against the former number you have 
2,22, over it the Signe Leo, and in the upper line 3 House; so you are directed to put 
the 2 deg. and 22 minutes of Leo upon the Cusp of the third house. 


Having now perfected the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, first, second, and third House, | 
must direct you how to perform the rest. 


You must for understanding hereof know, that the first six Signes of the Zodiack are 
opposite to the six last, as formerly | told you. 


Aries Libra Taurus Scorpio 
Gemini Sagittarius Cancer. Capricorn 
Leo Aquarius Virgo Pisces 


Viz. Aries is opposite to Libra, and Libra to Aries; to Taurus to Scorpio, and Scorpio 
to Taurus, and so all the rest in order. 


The twelve Houses also are opposite each to other: as thus 


10 11 12 1 2 3 
4 5 6 7 8 9 


So that the tenth house is opposite to the fourth, the fourth to the tenth; the eleventh 
to the fifth, the fifth to the eleventh, and so all the rest as you find placed: The use 
you are to make of it is this, That if on the Cusp of the tenth house you find the Signe 
Aries, then on the Cusp of the fourth the Signe Libra; and look what degree and 
minute of possesseth the Signe of the tenth house, the same degree and minute of 
the opposite Signe must be placed on the Cusp of the fourth house, and so of all the 
other Signes and Cusps of houses; and this is generall, and ever holdeth true; 
without which rule observed, you cannot erect the Figure aright. 


In our former Figure you see 19 Aquarius on the Cusp of the tenth 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


37 


house, Leo is opposite to Aquarius, and the fourth house to the tenth; so then | place 
the 19 degree of Leo upon the Cuspe of that house. 


Upon the line or Cusp of the eleventh house you see Pisces 17,6,Virgo is the Signe 
opposite to Pisces, and the fifth house to the eleventh; so that | placed the 17 degree 
and 6 minutes of Virgo upon the Cusp of the fifth house. 


The Cusp of the twelfth house is the 11,37 of Taurus, | see Scorpio is opposite to 
Taurus, and the sixth house to the twelfth; | therefore put the 11 degree and 37 
minutes of Scorpio on the Cusp of the sixth house. 


| doe so in the rest of the houses, and by this means | have framed the twelve 
houses, and placed the severall Signs of the Zodiack upon the Cusps as they ought 
to be. 


Having finished your twelve houses by the Method preceding, you must now learn to 
place the Planets therein; which you must doe by observing in the Ephemeris, the 
exact place of the Planet in Sign and Degree at noon the day of the Figure, and in 
what house you shall finde the Sign wherein the House is, in that House must you 
place the Planet, within the House if the Planet be in more Degrees then the Cuspe 
of the House; without the House, if his Degrees be lesse then those of the Cusp of 
the Houses. 


Over against the sixt day of January aforesaid, | find Saturn to be in 27.58. of Aries: | 
look for Aries in the Figure, but find it not; | find Pisces on the Cuspe of the eleventh, 
and Taurus on the Cuspe of the twelfth House; so | conclude that the Signe Aries is 
intercepted; for so we say when a Signe Is not upon any of the Cuspes of Houses, 
but included betwixt one House and another: | therefore place Saturn in the 11 
House, as you may see. 


In the next place | finde the place of Jupiter to be 27.40. Gemini. | find 25.31. Gemini 

to be on the Cuspe of the first House, because the Degrees adhering to Jupiter are 

meat then the Cuspe, | place Jupiter within the House. And because he Is noted 
etrograde | place the Letter R, the better to informe my judgment. 


In the fifth column of the Ephemeris | find Mars the sixth of January to be in the 


13.55. Capricorn; which Signe in the figure is the Cusp of the eighth House: | 
therefore place Mars as neer the Cusp 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


38 


as | can, but his Degrees in the Signe being lesse then the Cuspe of the House, | 
place him without the House. 


| find the Sun the sixth day of January to be In 26.39 Capricorn whom | place beyond 
the Cuspe of the eighth House, because the Degrees of the Sun in Capricorn are 
more then the Cuspe of the House. 


In the same line, and over against the sixt of January, | finde Venus to be in 10 
Degrees, and 53 minutes of Pisces. 


| finde the Signe of Pisces on the Cuspe of the eleventh House, and there | put 
Venus in the tenth House, neer the Cuspe of the eleventh House, but not in the 
House, because the Degrees of the Signe she is in are not equivalent to the Degrees 
of the Cuspe of the eleventh House, but are short of them. 


In the eigth Column | finde under the character of Mercury 13.18. above it Aquarius. | 
therefore place Mercury neer the Cuspe of the tenth House, but not in the House; for 
you may see he is neerer In Degrees to the Cuspe of the tenth house then the ninth; 
for by how much neerer he is in Degrees to the Cuspe of any House, nang the 
same Signe, by so much the neerer he ought to be placed to the Cuspe of that 
House. 


In the ninth Column, under the Column of the Moon | finde over against the sixth of 
January 20.54. and over the Figures Capricorn: so then | place the Moon very neer 
the Sun in the eighth House, and betwixt the Cupse of the house and the Sun; for 
you may see the Moon hath not so many Degrees as may put her beyond the Sun; 
nor hath she so few to be without the eighth House. How to reduce the motion of the 
Moon an other Planets to any house of the day, you shall be instructed hereafter. 


In the tenth column | find over against my said day, 10.10.over against it Leo and 
North Node: so you see the North Node is in 11 deg. 10 mm. of Leo; which | place in 
the middle of the third house, because ten degrees are very neer as nigh the Cuspe 
of the third house as fourth; the South Node being always in the opposite Signe and 
degree at the North Node, | place in the ninth house, viz. In 11 degrees 10 minutes of 
Aquarius, This being done, | must observe how the Moon Seperates and applies the 
same day; | find the sixt of January on the right-hand page of the book, that the Moon 
did last seperate from a Conjunction of Mars and now is applying to a Conjunction of 
on at 11,48, that is at eleven of clock and 48 minutes after at night, then to a 
quare 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


39 


of Saturn at fourteen hours after noon, or at two of clock the next morning. 


Thus have you one Figure of Heaven erected, and the Planets therein placed, though 
not rectified to the hour of the day, for how to reduce their motion to any hour | shall 
shew hereafter: But because | have by experience found, that many Learners have 
been much stumbled for want of sufficient directions in former Introductions to set a 
Scheame of Heaven, | shall be a little more copious, and shew an example or two 
more. 


| would erect a Figure on Saturday the 17 of January 1646. for eleven of clock and 
twenty after noon: the Sun that day at noon Is In 7 degrees and 52 of Aquarius: In the 
eleventh page of the Table of Houses | find Sun In Aquarius, under the column of the 
tenth house | look for the eighth degree of Aquarius, because 52 minutes want but 
little of a degree; over against the eighth degree on the left-hand, under the title of 
Time From Noon, | find 20 42, viz. 20 hours 42 minutes; so then | work thus, 

Time of the day is 11 20. 

20 42 

hours and minutes answering to the eighth degree of Aquarius, there being 62 min. 
viz, two min. more than one hour, | take that hour and adde both numbers together, 
they make ........... 32 02. From 32 hours and 2 min. | subtract 24 hours, as | must 
ever doe, if there be more then 24 hours, and then there remaines as you see, 
8 hours and 32 02 


2 min. which | find not 24 Subtracted. 
precisely in the Table of 
Houses, but | find 8,0, 8 02 Remaines. 


which is neer my number, and which serves very well; over against 8h and Om | find 
28,0, and in the upper part | find Cancer, and over it the tenth house, so then | have 
28 degrees, 0 min. of Cancer for the Cuspe of my tenth house: in the same line, on 
the right hand to the 28 degr. of Cancer, you shall find 4 36, over it Virgo, In the 
upper part of the eleventh house: so then 4 degr. 36 mm. of Virgo are the Cuspe of 
ne ed house; then have you over against the said number of S hours 0 min. in 
the fourt 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


40 


column, O Libra 4, over its head the twelfth house, this tels you the Cusp of the 
twelfth house is 0 degr. 4 min. of Libra: in the fifth column over against the said 
former number, you have 21.3, over them figures at the top of the page, Libra, and 
then the first house; which signifies, that you must place the 21 deg.and 3 min. of 
Libra on the cusp of the first house: poled to the 21.degr. and 3 min of Libra in 
the sixth column, | find 13,57, over it the sign Scorpio, in the upper part of the second 
house, by which | know, that 13 degr. and 57 min of Scorpio must be placed on the 
cusp of the second house. In the seventh and utmost column over against my 
foresaid number of 8 hours and 0 min. | find 15.46, over them the sign Sagittarius, in 
the upper column over their head the third house, pointing out 15 degr. 46 min of 
Sagittarius for the Cusp of the third house; so then your Cusps of Houses stand thus: 


Tenth house 28 Cancer. 
Eleventh house 4.36 Virgo. 
Twelfth house 0.4 Libra. 

First house 21.3 Libra. 
Second House 13.57 Scorpio. 
Third house 15.46 Sagittarius. 


The Cusps of the other houses are found out by the opposite Signes and houses, as 
| formerly directed, viz, the fourth house being opposite ever to the tenth, and the 
Signe Capricorn to Cancer. | place the 28 degr. of Capricorn on the Cusp of the 
fourth house: the fifth is opposite to the eleventh, and Pisces is the opposite Signe to 
Virgo, | therefore place the 4 degr. and 36 min. of Pisces for the Cusp of the fifth: the 
twelfth house is opposite to the sixth, so is Aries opposite to Libra, therefore | place 
the 21 degr. and 3 min. of Aries, the opposite Signe to Libra, on the Cusp of the 
seventh house: the eighth house is opposite to the second, and Taurus to Scorpio, | 
therefore place the 13 degr. and 57 min. of Taurus on the Cusp of the eighth house: 
the ninth house is opposite to the third, and Gemini to Sagittarius, | therefore make 
the 15 degr. and 46 min. of Gemini the Cusp of the ninth house: The Planets are to 
be placed in the 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


At 


Figure as formerly directed; nor let it trouble you, if you find sometimes two signs in 
one house, or almost three, or sometimes one sign to be on the Cusps of three 
houses, ever place your Planets orderly as neer the degree of the house, as the 
number of degrees your Planet is in will permit. 


You must ever remember that if your hour of the day be in the morning, or as we say 
Ante Meridiem, or before noon, you must reckon the time, as from the noon of the 
day preceding: As for example. 


| would erect a Figure the 26. day of January 1646. being Monday, for 9. of the clock 
and 45 min. before noon. 


My time stands thus: 9 ho. 45 min. 


To this | adde 12 hours, because it is properly in our account, the 21 hour and 45 
minutes after noon of the Sunday preceding: so then you may say thus; the Figure is 
set for 9. hours and 45 minutes Ante Meridiem, or before noon of the Monday. 


Or else 25 of January, being Sunday, 21 hours and 45 min. Post Meridiem, or after 
noon, which is all one with the former time. 


| find the Sun at noon the same 26 day, to be in 16 degr. and 59 min. of Aquarius; | 
look in the Table of Houses what hours and min. correspond to the 17 degrees of 
Aquarius in the tenth house; in the eleventh page | find Sun Aquarius, and along in 
the column of the tenth 17 degr. 0 min. on the left hand | find over against them, 31 
hours 18 min. to these | add the hours and min. of the 


day, viz. 21.45; added together, they make 43h 03m. 
from which in regard they are more then 24 hours, 
| subtract 24. 

43 03 

24 


Rests 19 03 


With my 19 hours and 3 min. | enter the Table of Houses, and under the title of hours 
and minutes, or Time from noon, | seek my number, In the tenth page | find 19 hours 
and 1 min. which is the next number unto my desire, over against it | see 14.0, and in 
the upper part of Capricorn and tenth house, signifying the 14 degr. of the Sign 
Capricorn is to be placed on the Cusp of the 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


42 


tenth house, the rest of the houses are found out in order as they stand in the Table 
of Houses over against my number of 19 hours and 1 min. | hope these examples 
will be sufficient for all young Learners; but that they may presently consider whether 
they have set their Figure right yea or no, let them take this general rule, that if the 
Figure be erected from noon to Sunset, the Sun will be in the ninth, eighth or seventh 
house; if it be erected from Sunset till midnight, he shal find the Sun in the sixth, fifth 
or fourth house; if it be set from midnight till Sunrise, he shall find the Sun in the third, 
second or first house; if the Figure be set from Sunrise till noon, then he shall find the 
Sun in the twelfth, eleventh or tenth house, &c. 


CHAP. V. 


Of the daily motion of the Planets, and how to reduce 
their motion to any house of the day, 
and to the Meridian of London. 


Ws have seldom occasion to erect a scheam of Heaven just at noon, to which time 
the motions of the Planets are exactly calculated, and need not any rectification; 
but usually all Questions are made either some hours before, or after noon; therefore 
it is needfull you know how to take their diurnall or daily motion, or how many 
degrees or min. they move in 24 hours, that thereby you may have a proportion to 
adde to the place of your Planets according to the hour of the day or night when you 
set your Figure: And although in horary questions, it occasioneth no error (except in 
the motion of the Moon) yet | thought fit to instruct the Learner herewith, that so he 
may know how to doe his work handsomely. Example. 


You must set down the place of your Planet in Signe, degree and minute as you find 
him at noon; and if your Planet be direct, you must subtract him in degree and minute 
from the place he is in the day susbequent: but when a Planet is retrograde, you 
must doe the contrary, viz, subtract the motion of your Planet the day subsequent 
from the day going before. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


43 


Example: 


January 7. at noon, Saturn is 28, 0 Aries 
January 6. at noon, Saturn is 27,58 Daily motion is 2 min. 


Here you see the daily motion of Saturn is onely two minutes. 


Jan. 6 Jupiter R 27,40 Gemini 
Jan. 7 Jupiter 27,34 Daily motion is 6. min. 


Jan. 7 Mars is in 14,41 Capricorn 
Jan. 6 Mars is in 13,55 


46 
So the Diurnall motion of Mars is 46 min. 


Jan. 7 Sun is in 27,40 Capricorn 
Jan. 6 Sun is in 26,39 


1,01 
The daily motion of the Sun is one degr. and one min. 


Jan. 7 Venus is in 12,02 Pisces 
Jan. 6 Venus is in 10,53 


1,09 
The daily motion of Venus is 1 degree and 9 min. 


Jan. 7 Mercury is in 14,45 Aquarius 
Jan. 6 Mercury is in 13,18 


1,27 
So the diurnall motion of Mercury is 1 degr. 27 min. 


Jan. 7 Moon is in 3,01 Aquarius 
Jan. 6 Moon is in 20,54 Capricorn 


Subtract 20 degr. 54 min. of Capricorn from 30 degr. the completment of a Signe, 
and there rest 9. degr. 6.min. which added to 3.degr.1.min. of Aquarius, make the 
diurnall motion of the Moon to be 12 degr. and 7 min. The work had been easier, but 
that the Moon was removed into another Signe before the day subsequent at noon. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


44 


Jan. 6 North Node is in 11,10 Leo 
Jan. 7 North Node is in 10,24 


46 


The motion of the North Node is 46 min. whom you must carefully observe, for he 
sometimes moves forward in the sign, sometimes backward, which you may easily 
perceive by the Ephemeris, without further instruction. 


How to find the quantity of the hourly motion of 
any Planet by the Table following. 


n every Figure you set, the place of the Planets ought to be rectified to the hour of 

the setting the Figure, especially the place of the Moon, because of her swift 
motion; in the Planets you need not be scrupulous, but take whole degrees without 
sensible error, or indeed any at all: this | mean in Questions; but in Nativities, you are 
to have the places of them exactly to degrees and minutes; and above all, the motion 
of the Sun to minutes and seconds, because by his motion we set the yearly 
revolutions of Nativities. 


| shall onely deliver the practice of two or three Examples, and leave the rest to the 
diligence of every Learner. The Table followeth. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


45 


de | mi | sec | th de mi | sec | th de | mi | sec) th 
mi | sec | th 4h mi sec | th 4h mi | sec | th 4h 
1 0 2 30 22 0 55 0 43 1 47 | 30 
2 0 5 0 23 0 57 | 30 44 1 50 0 
3 0 5 30 24 1 1 0 45 1 42 | 30 
4 0 10 0 25 1 2 30 46 1 55 0 
5 0 12 | 20 26 1 5 0 47 1 57 | 30 
6 0 15 0 27 1 ‘4 30 48 2 0 0 
7 0 17 | 30 28 1 10 0 49 2 2 30 
8 0 20 0 29 1 12 | 20 50 2 5 0 
9 0 22 | 30 30 1 15 0 51 2 7 30 
10 0 25 0 31 1 17 | 30 52 2 10 0 
11 0 27 | 30 32 1 20 0 53 2 12 | 30 
12 0 30 0 33 1 22 | 20 54 2 15 0 
13 0 32 | 30 34 1 25 0 55 2 17 | 30 
14 0 a5 0 35 1 27 | 30 56 2 20 0 
15 0 37 | 30 36 1 30 0 57 2 22 | 30 
16 0 40 0 37 1 32 | 30 58 2 25 0 
17 0 42 | 30 38 1 35 0 59 2 27 | 30 
18 0 45 0 39 1 37 | 30 60 2 30 0 
19 0 47 | 30 40 1 40 0 61 2 32 0 
20 0 50 0 41 1 42 | 30 
21 0 52 | 30 42 1 45 0 


In the preceding scheam of the sixth of Jan. you find the diurnall motion of the Sun to 
be 61 min. or one deg. one min. in the very last line of this Table 1 find 61, over the 
head of it deg. min. but over against 61 to the right hand, | find 2,32,30, which tels 
you, that the hourly motion of the Sun is, 2 min. 32 seconds, and thirty thirds, as you 
may see in the upper part of the column over the heads of the figures. 


The daily motion of Mars is 46 min. in the Figure abovenamed; 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


46 


| enter down the first column, and find 46, against it | find 1 min. 55 seconds to be 
one hours motion of Mars, when in 24 hours he moves 46 min. 


You must note, if you enter with minutes, you must have minutes, if with seconds, 
seconds; and so in the rest: This in the motion of Saturn Jupiter, Mars, Sun, Venus, 
Mercury; with the Moon otherwayes. 


If the motion of your Planet be above 61 min. viz. 70 or 75 or 80 min. then enter the 
Table twice: as for example. 


The motion of Mercury is, as you perceive, 1 degr. and 27 min. | would know what his 
hourly motion is, | enter first with 60 min. against which | find 2,30, viz. 2 min. 30 
seconds, then | enter with 27, against which | find 1,7,30, viz. 1 min. 7 seconds, thirty 
thirds, which | cast away, and adde the two former ne eee thus, 


17 
3 37 


added together they make 3 min. 37 seconds, and so much is the hourly motion of 
Mercury, when his diurnall motion is 87 minutes. 


The daily motion of the Moon you see is 12 degrees and 7 minutes. | enter down the 
first column with 12, against it | find 0,30,0, viz. 0 degr, 30 min. 0 seconds. 


| enter with 7, over against it | find 0 17 30 
| adde the number to it 30 =O 0 


they produce 30 minutes 17 seconds, and 30 thirds for the hourly motion of the Moon 
in our figure: you may in her operation reject the seconds and thirds. 


By this rule | would know where the true place of the Sun is at that hour when we 
erected the Figure. 


The hour of the day is 1:30, the time admitted by Eichstadius for reducing his 
Ephemeris to the Meridian of London, is 50 min. of an hour in motion, for they being 
more East then we, the Sun comes sooner to them at their noon, then to us that are 
more West-ward, by so much time: | adde 50 min. to my former time, viz. 1.30, the 
whole is then 2 hours and 20 min. now if the motion of the Sun in one hour be 2 min. 
32 seconds 

then in two hours it will be 2 min. 32 seconds more. 


added together they are 5 min. 04 seconds: 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


47 


Which being added to the place of the Sun at noon, make the true place of the Sun at 
time of erection of the Figure, 26 deg. 44 min. and 4 sec. of Capricorn; there is 20 
min. of one hour more; but because they produce nothing of consequence, | omit 
further herein. 


The place of the Moon the same day at noon is 20 54 Capricorn; if you adde her 
motion in two hours, you shall see it will be twice 30 min. viz, one whole degr. and 
then her true place will be 21 54 Capricorn. 


We that say many Figures, never care for this exactnesse, but use this generall rule; 
In the motion of the Sun, Venus and Mercury, if the figure be for six or seven hours 
after noon, we adde about 15 min. to their places at noon, and so allowing for every 
six hours 15 min. motion. 


Because the Moon goeth 12,13 or 14 degr. in on day, we constantly adde to her 
place at noon 3 degr. for every six hours, and some mm. over; doe so with the other 
Planets according to their diurne motion. He that would doe them more exact, may 
work them by multiplication and division, or procure some old Ephemeris, wherein 
there is usually large proportionall Tables concerning this business. 


Now as | have acquainted you, that in motion of the Planets you must in a Nativity or 
Question, if you please, allow the Planets so much to be added unto their place at 
noon as can be got in 50 min. of an hour, so you must observe the contrary in the 
Aspects. As for example: The sixt of January you find Moon Square Saturn 14 P.M. 
viz, the Moon comes to the square aspect of Saturn at 14 hours after the noon of the 
sixth day of January, or at two of the clock the next morning on the seventh day: now 
you must subduct 50 min. of an hour from 14 hours, and then the true time of the 
Moon her perfect square to Saturn with us at London, is at 13 hours and 10 min. after 
noon: doe so in all the aspects &c. 


CHAP. VI. 


Of the twelve Houses of Heaven, and some Names 
or Termes of Astrologie. 


a whole spheare of Heaven is divided into four equal parts by the Meridian and 
Horizon, and again into four Quadrants, 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


48 


and every Quadrant again into three parts, according to other Circles drawn by points 
of Sections of the aforesaid Meridian and Horizon; so the whole Heaven is divided 
into twelve equall parts, which the Astrologers call Houses or Mansions, taking their 
beginning from the East. 


The first Quadrant is described from the East to the Midheaven, or from the line of 
the first house to the line of the tenth house, and contains the twelfth, eleventh and 
tenth houses, it’s called the Orientiall, Vernall, Masculine, Sanguine, Infant quarter. 


The second Quadrant is from the Cusp of the Mid-heaven to the cusp of the seventh 
house, containing the ninth, eighth and seventh houses, and is called the Meridian, 
Estivall, Feminine, Youthfull, Cholerick quarter. 


The third Quadrant is from the eae of the seventh house to the cusp of the fourth 
house, and contains the sixth, fifth and fourth houses, is called the Occidentall, 
Autumnall, Masculine, Melanchollique, Manhood, cold and dry. 


The fourth Quadrant is from the cusp of the fourth to the cusp of the first house, and 
contains the third, second and first house, is Northern, Feminine, Old Age, of the 
nature of Winter, Phlegmatique. 


The first, tenth, seventh and fourth houses hereof are called Angles, the eleventh, 
second, eighth & fifth are called Succedants, the third, twelfth, ninth and sixth, are 
termed Cadents. The Angles are most powerfull, the Succedants are next in vertue, 
the Cadents poor, and of little efficacy: the Succedant houses follow the Angles, the 
Cadents come next the Succedants; in force and vertue they stand so in order: 


1 $10 7 4 11 5 9 3 2 8 6 12 
The meaning whereof is this, that two Planets equally dignified, the one in the 
Ascendant, the other in the tenth house, you shall judge the Planet in the Ascendant 
somewhat of more power to effect what he is Significator of, then he that is in the 
tenth: doe so in the rest as they stand in order, remembering that Planets in Angles 
doe more forcibly shew their effects. 


When we name the Lord of the Ascendant, or Significator 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


49 


of the Querent, or thing quesited; we mean no other thing then that Planet who is 
Lord of that Sign which ascends, or Lord of that Sign from which house the thing 
demanded is required; as if from the seventh house, the Lord of that sign descending 
on the cusp is Significator, and so in the rest: but of this in the ensuing Judgments. 


Cosignificator is when you find another Planet in aspect or conjunction with that 
Planet who is the principall significator; this said Planet shall have signification more 
or lesse, and either, assist or not, in effecting the same thing desired; and so hath 
something to doe in the judgment, and ought to be considered: if a friendly Planet, he 
notes good; if an infortune the contrary, viz, either the destruction of the thing, or 
disturbance in it. 


Almuten, of any house is that Planet who hath most dignities in the sign ascending or 
cond upon the Cusp of any house, whereon, or from whence, you require your 
judgment. 


Almuten of a Figure, is that Planet who in Essentiall and Accidentall dignities, is most 
powerfull in the whole Scheam of Heaven. 


The Dragons Head we sometimes call Anabibazon. 
The Dragons Taile Catabibazon. 


The Longitude of a Planet is his distance from the beginning of Aries, numbered 
according to the succession of signs, unto the place of the Planet. 


Latitude is the distance of a Planet from the Ecliptick, either towards the North or 
South, by which means we come to say, a Planet hath either Septentrionall or 
Meridionall Latitude, when either he recedes from the Ecliptick towards the North or 
South. 


Onely the Sun continually moveth in the Ecliptick, and never hath any latitude. 
Declination of a Planet is his distance from the AEquator, and as he declines from 


thence either Northward or Southward, so is his declination nominated either North or 
South. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


50 


CHAP. VII. 


Of the twelve Houses, their Nature and Signification. 


As before we have said there are twelve signs, and also twelve Houses of Heaven, 
so now we are come to relate the nature of these twelve Houses; the exact 
knowledge whereof is so requisite, that he who shall learn the nature of the Planets 
and Signs without exact judgment of the Houses, is like an impovident man, that 
furnisheth with variety of householdstuffe, having no place wherein to bestow them. 


There is nothing appertaining to the life of man in this world, which in one way or 
other hath not relation to one of the twelve Houses of Heaven, and as the twelve 
signs are appropriate to the particular members of mans body; so also doe the twelve 
houses represent not onely the severall parts of man, but his actions, quality of life 
and living, and the curiosity and judgment of our Fore-fathers in Astrology, was such, 
as they have alotted to every house a particular signification, and so distinguished 
humane accidents throughout the twelve houses, as he that understands the 
Questions appertaining to each of them, shall not want sufficient grounds whereon to 
judge or give a rationall answer upon any contingent accident, and successe thereof. 


Of the first House and its Signification. 


The first house, which containeth all that part of Heaven from the line where the 
figure one standeth, until the figure two, where the second house beginneth. 


It hath signification of the life of man, of the stature, colour, complexion, form and 
shape of him that propounds the Question, or is born; in Eclipses and great 
Conjunctions, and upon the Sun his annuall ingresse into Aries; it signifieth the 
common people, or generall State of that Kingdom where the Figure is erected. 


And as it is the first house, it represents the head and face of man, so that if either 


Saturn, Mars or South Node be in this House, either at the time of the Question, or at 
the time of birth, you shall observe 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


51 


some blemish in the face, or in that member appropriate to the signe that then is 
upon the cusp of the house; as if Aries be in the Ascendant, the mark, mole, or scarre 
is without faile in the head or face; and if few degrees of the signe ascend, the mark 
is in the upper part of the head; if the middle of the sign be on the cusp, the mole, 
mark or scar is in the middle of the face, or neer it; if the later degrees ascend, the 
face is blemished neer the chin, towards the neck: This | have found true in hundreds 
of examples. 


Of colours, it hath the White; that is, if a Planets be in this house that hath 
signification of white, the complexion of the Party is more pale, white and wan; or if 
you enquire after the colour of the cloathe of any man, if his significator be in the first 
house, and in a sign corresponding, the parties apparell is white or gray, or 
somewhat neer that colour, so also if the Question be for cattle, when their 
significators are found in this house, it denotes them to be of that colour or neer it: 
The house is Masculine. 


The Cosignificators of this house are Aries and Saturn; for as this house is the first 
house, so is Aries the first signe, and Saturn the first of the Planets, and therefore 
when Saturn is but moderately well fortified, in this house, and in any benevolent 
aspect of Jupiter, Venus, Sun or Moon, it promiseth a good sober constitution of 
body, and usually long life: Mercury doth also joy in this house, because it represents 
the Head, and he the Tongue, Fancy and Memory: when he is well dignified and 
posited in this house, he produceth good Orators: it is called the Ascendant, because 
when the Sun commeth to the cusp of this house, he ascends, or then ariseth, and is 
visible in our Horizon. 


Questions concerning the Second House. 


From this house is required judgment concerning the estate or fortune of him that 
asks the question, or his Wealth or Poverty, of all removeable Goods, Money lent, of 
Profit or game, losse or damage; in suits of Law, it signifies a mans Friends or 
Assistants; in private Duels, the Querents second; in an Eclipse or Great 
Conjunction, the poverty or Wealth of 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


52 


the people; in the Sun his entrance into Aries, it represents the Ammunition, Allies 
and Support the Common-wealth shall have; it imports their Magazines. 


It represents in man the neck, and hinder parts of it towards the shoulders, of colours, 
the green. 


So that if one make demand concerning any thing specified above in this house, you 
must look for signification from hence: It’s a feminine house and Succedart, called in 
some Latin Authors Anaphora. 


It hath Cosignificators Jupiter and Taurus; for is Jupiter be placed in this house, or be 
Lord hereof, it's an argument of an estate or fortune; Sun and Mars are never well 
placed in this house, either of them shew dispersion of substance, according to the 
Capacity and quality of him that is either born or asks the questions. 


The Third House. 


Hath signification of Brethren, Sisters, Cozens and Kindred, Neighbours, small 
Journeys, or inland-Journeys, oft removing from one place to another, Epistles, 
Letters, Rumours, Messengers: It doth rule the Shoulders, Armes, Hands and 
Fingers. 


Of Colours, it governeth the Red and Yellow, or Croceall, or Sorrell colour: It hath 
Cosignificators, of the Signe Gemini, of the Planet Mars; which is one reason why 
Mars in this house, unlesse joyned with Saturn is not very unfortunate, it is a Cadent 
house, and is the joy of the Moon; for if she be posited therein, especially in a 
moveable sing, it’s an argument of much travell, trotting and trudging, or of being 
seldom quiet: The house is Masculine. 


The Fourth House. 


Giveth Judgment of Fathers in generall & ever of his Father that enquires, or that is 
born; of Lands, Houses, Tenements, Inheritances, Tillage of the earth, Treasures 
hidden, the determination or end of any thing; Towns, Cities or Castles, besieged or 
not besieged; all ancient Dwellings, Gardens, Fields, Pastures, Orchards; the quality 
and nature of the grounds 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


53 


one purchaseth, whether Vineyards, Cornfielfd, &c. whether the ground be Woody, 
Stony or barren. 


The Sign of the fourth denoteth the Town, the Lord thereof, the Governour: It ruleth 
the Brest, Lungs. 


Of Colours, the Red: It’s Cosignificator is Cancer, and of Planets the Sun; we call it 
the Angle of the Earth, or Imum Coeli; it is feminine, and the North Angle: In Nativities 
or Questions, this fourth house represents Fathers, so doth the Sun by day and 
Saturn by night; yet if the Sun be herein placed, he is not ill, but rather shews the 
Father to be of a noble disposition, &c. 


The Fifth House. 


By this house we judge of Children, of Embassadours, of the state of a Woman with 
child, of Banquets, of Ale-houses, Tavernes, Playes, Messengers or Agents for 
Republick; of the wealth of the Father, the Ammunition of a Town beseiged; if the 
Woman with child shall bring forth male or female; of the health or sicknesse of his 
Son or Daughter that asks the Question. 


It ruleth the Stomack, Liver, Heart, Sides and Back, and is masculine. 


Of Colours, Black and White, or Honey-colour, and is a Succedant house; It’s 
Cosignificators are Leo and Venus, who doth joy in this house, in regard it’s the 
house of Pleasure, Delight and Merriment; it’s wholly unfortunate by Mars or Saturn, 
and they therein shew disobedient children and untoward. 


The Sixth House. 


It concerneth Men and Mid-servants, Gallislaves, Hogges, Sheep, Goats, Hares, 
Connies, all manner of lesser Cattle, and profit and losse got thereby; Sicknesse, it’s 
quality and cause, principall humour offending, curable or not curable, whether the 
disease be short or long; Day—labourers, Tenants, Farmers, Shepherds, Hogheards, 
Neatherds, Warriners; and it signifieth Unkles, or the Fathers Brothers and Sisters. 


It ruleth the inferiour part of the Belly, and intestines even to 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


54 


the Arse: this house is a Feminine and Cadent house, unfortunate, as having no 
aspect to the Ascendant. 


Of Colours, black colour, Mars rejoyceth in this house, but his Cosignificator is of the 
Signes Virgo, of Planets Mercury; we usually find that Mars and Venus in Conjunction 
in this house, are arguments of a good Physitian. 


The Seventh House. 


It giveth judgment of Marriage, and describes the person inquired after, whether it be 
Man or Woman, all manner of Love questions, our publique enemies; the Defendant 
in a Law-suit, in Warre the opposing party; all quarrels, Duels, Law-suits; in Astrology 
the Artist himself; in Physick the Physitian; Theeves and Thefts; the person stealing, 
whether Man or Woman, Wives, Sweetharts; their shape, description, condition, 
Nobly or ignobly born: in an Annuall ingresse, whether Warre or Peace may be 
expected: of Victory, who over-comes, and who worsted; Fugitives or runawayes; 
Banished and Out-lawed-men. 


It hath cosignificator Libra and Moon, Saturn or Mars unfortunate herein, shew ill in 
Marriage. 
Of Colour, a dark Blacke colour. 


It ruleth the Haunches, and the Navill to the Buttocks; and is called the Angle of the 
West: and is Masculine. 


The Eighth House. 
The Estate of Men deceased, Death, its quality and nature; the Wills, Legacies and 
Testaments of Men deceased; Dowry of the Wife, Portion of the Maid, whether much 
or little, easie to be btained or with difficulty. In Duels it represents the Adversaries 
Second; in Lawsuits the Defendants friends. What kinde of Death a Man shall dye, 
it signifies fear and anguish of Minde. Who shall enjoy or be heir to the Deceased. 
It rules the Privy-parts. Of colours, the Green and Black. 


Of Signes it hath Scorpio for Cosignificator, and Saturn, the Hemoroids, the Stone, 
Strangury, Poysons, and Bladder are ruled 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


55 


by this house; and is a succedant House, and Feminine. 


The Ninth House. 


By this House we give judgment of Voyages or long journies beyond Seas of 
Religious men, or Clergy of any kinde, whether Bishops or inferiour Ministers; 
Dreams, Visions, forraign Countries, of Books, Learning, Church Livings, or Benef 
ices, Advowsions; of the kindred of ones Wife, & sic e contrario. 


Of colours it hath the Green and White. 


Of mans body it ruleth the Fundament, the Hippes and Thighes, Sagittarius and 
Jupiter are cosignificators of this House; for if Jupiter be herein placed, it naturally 
signifies a devout man in his Religion, or one modestly given; | have oft observed 
when the Dragons tayle, or Mars or Saturn have been infortunately placed in this 
House; the Querent hath either been little better then a Atheist or a desperate 
Sectarist: the Sun rejoyceth to be in this House, which is Masculine, and Cadent. 


The Tenth House. 


Commonly it personateth Kings, Princes, Dukes, Earles, Judges, prime Officers, 
Commanders in chief, whether in Armies or Towns; all sorts of Magistracy and 
Officers in Authority, Mothers, Honour, Preferment, Dignity, Office, Lawyers; the 
profession or Trade any one useth; it signifies Kingdoms, Empires, Dukedoms, 
Countries. 


It hath of colours Red and White, and ruleth the knees and Hammes. 


Its called the Medium coeli, or Mid-heaven, and is Feminine. Its cosignificators are 
Capricorn and Mars; either Jupiter or the Sun doe much Fortunate this House when 
they are posited therein, Saturn or South Node usually deny Honor, as to persons of 
quality, or but little esteem in the world to a vulgar person, not much joy in his 
Profession, Trade or Mystery, is a Mechanick. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


56 


The Eleventh House. 


It doth naturally represent Friends and Friendship, Hope, Trust, Confidence, the 
Praise, or Dispraise of any one; the Fidelity or falsenesse of Friends; as to Kings it 
personates their Favourites, Councellours, Servants, their Associates or Allyes, their 
Money, Exchequer or Treasure; in Warre their Ammunition and Souldiery; it 
represents Courtiers, &c. in a Common-wealth governed by a few of the Nobles and 
Commons, it personates their assistance in Councell: as in London the tenth House 
represents the Lords Major; the eleventh the Common-Councell; the Ascendant the 
generality of the Commoners of the said City. 


Of members it ruleth the Legs to the Ancles. 
Of colours, it ruleth the Saffron or Yellow. 


It hath of the Signs Aquarius, and Sun of the Planets, for cosignificators Jupiter doth 
especially rejoyce in this House; its a succedant House, and masculine, and in 
vertue is equivalent either to the seventh or fourth Houses. 


The Twelfth House. 


It hath signification of private Enemies, of Witches, great Cattle, as Horses, Oxen, 
Elephants, &c. Sorrow, Tribulation, Imprisonments, all manner of affliction, self- 
undoing, &c. and of such men as maliciously undermine their neighbours, or inform 
secretly against them. 


It hath cosignificators Pisces and Venus; Saturn doth joy in that House, For naturally 
Saturn is Author of mischief; and it ruleth in Mans body the Feet. 


In Colour it presents the Green. 


Its a Cadent House, Feminine, and vulgarly sometimes called Cataphora, as all 
Cadent Houses may be. This is the true Character of the severall Houses, accordin 
to the Ptolomeian Doctrine, and the experience my self have had for some yeers: 
must confesse the Arabians have made severall other divisions of the Houses, but | 
could never in my practise finde any verity in them, wherefore | say nothing of them. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


57 


CHAP. VIII. 


Of the Planet SATURN, and his Signification. 


[Names] He is called usually Saturn, but in some Authors Chronor Phoenon, Falcifer. 


[Colour] He is the supreamest or highest of all Planets; is placed betwixt Jupiter and 
the Firmament, he is not very bright or glorious, or doth he twincle or sparkle, but is of 
a Pale, Wan or Leaden, Ashy colour slow in motion. [Motion] Finishing his Course 
through the twelve signs of the Zodiack in 29 yeers, 157 dayes, or thereabouts; his 
middle motion is two minutes and one second; his diurnall motion sometimes is three, 
four, five, or six minutes, or seldom more. [Latitude] His greatest North Latitude from 
the Ecliptick is two degrees 48 minutes; his South Latitude from the Ecliptick is two 
degrees 49 minutes; and more then this he hath not. 


[Houses] In the Zodiack he hath two of the twelve Signes for his Houses, viz. 
Capricorn his Night-house, Aquarius his Day-house; he has his Exaltation in Libra, he 
receives his Fall in Aries; he rejoyceth in the sign Aquarius. 


pe He governeth the Aiery Triplicity by day, which is composed of these Signs; 
Gemini, Libra, Aquarius; [Terms] in all the twelve Signe he hath these degrees for his 
Terms, allotted him by Ptolomy. 


In Aries, 27, 28, 29, 30. 

In Taurus, 23, 24, 25, 26. 

In Gemini, 22, 23, 24, 25. 

In Cancer, 28, 29, 30. 

In Leo, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 

In Virgo, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 
In Libra, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 

In Scorpio, 28, 29, 30. 

In Sagittarius, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. 
In Capricorn, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 
In Aquarius, 1, 2, 054) D, 6. 

In Pisces, 27, 28, 29, 30. 


The meaning whereof is, that if Saturn in any Question be in 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


58 


any of these degrees wherein he hath a Terme, he cannot be said to be Peregrine, or 
void of essentiall dignities; or if he be in any of these degrees allotted him for his 
Face or Decanate, he cannot then be said to be peregrine: understand this in all the 
other Planets. 


He hath also these for his Face or Decanate. 


In Taurus, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 
In Leo, 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 
In Libra, 11, 12,13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
In Sagittarius, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 
In Pisces, 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 


He continueth Retrograde 140 dayes. 


He is five dayes in his first station before Retrogradation, and so many in his second 
station before Direction. 


Nature] He is a Diurnall Planet, Cold and Dry (being far removed from the heat of the 
un) and moyst Vapours, Melancholick, Earthly, Masculine, the greater Infortune, 
author of Solitarinesse, Malevolent, &c. 


[Manners & Actions, when well dignified.] Then he is profound in Imagination, in his 
Acts severe, in words reserved, in speaking and giving very spare, in labour patient, 
in arguing or disputing grave, in obtaining the goods of this life studious and 
solicitous, in all manner of actions austere. 


[When ill.] Then he is envious, covetous, jealous and mistrustfull, timorus, sordid, 
outwardly dissembling, sluggish, suspicious, stubborn, a contemner of women, a 
close lyar, malicious, murmuring, never contented, ever repining. 


[Corporature] Most part his Body more cold and dry, of a middle stature; his 
complexion pale, swartish or muddy, his Eyes little and black, looking downward, a 
broad Forehead, black or sad Hair, and it hard or rugged, great Eares; hanging, 
lowring Eye-brows, thick Lips and Nose, a rare or thin Beard, a lumpish, unpleasant 
Countenance, either holding his Head forward or stooping, his Shoulders broad and 
large, and many times crooked, his Belly somewhat short and lank, his Thighs spare; 
lean and not long; his Knees and Feet indecent, many times shoveling or hitting one 
against another, &c. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


59 


[SATURN ORIENTAL] You must observe, if Saturn be Orientall of the Sun, the 
stature is more short, but decent and well composed. 


[OCCIDENTALL] The man is more black and lean, and fewer Hairs; and again, if he 
want latitude, the body is more lean, if he have great latitude, the body is more fat or 
fleshy; if the latitude be Meridionall or South, more fleshy; if the latitude be 
Meridionall or South, more fleshy, but quick in motion. 

If the latitude be North, hairy and much flesh. 

Saturn in his first station, a little fat. 

In his second station, fat, ill favoured Bodies, and weak; 

and this observe constantly in all the other Planets. 


QUALITY OF eels generall he signifieth Husbandmen, Clowns, Beggars, Day- 
abourers, Old-men, Fathers, Grand-fathers, Monks, Jesuits, Sectarists. 


[PROFESSION.] Curriers, Night-farmers, Miners under ground, Tinners, Potters, 
Broom-men, Plummers, Brick-makers, Malsters, Chimney-sweepers, Sextons of 
Churches, Bearers of dead corps, Scavengers, Hostlers, Colliers, Carters, Gardiners, 
Ditchers, Chandlers, Diers of Black cloth, an Herdsman, Shepheard or Cow-keeper. 


[SICKNESSES.] All Impediments in the right Ears, Teeth, all quartan Agues 
proceeding of cold, dry and melancholly Distempers, Leprocies, Rheumes, 
Consumptions, black Jaundies, Palsies, Tremblings, vain Feares, Fantasies, Dropsie, 
the Hand and Footgout, Apoplexies, Dog-hunger, too much flux of the Hemoroids, 
Ruptures if in Scorpio or Leo, in any ill aspect with Venus. 


[SAVOURS.] Sower, Bitter, Sharp, in mans body he principally ruleth the Spleen. 


[HEARBS.] He governeth Beirsfoot, Starwort, Woolf-bane, Hemlock, Ferne, Hellebor 
the white and black, Henbane, Ceterach or Fingerferne, Clotbur or Burdock, Parsnip, 
Dragon, Pulse, Vervine, Mandrake, Poppy, Mosse, Nightshade, Bythwind, Angelica, 
Sage, Box, Tutfan, Orage or golden Hearb, Spinach, Shepheards Purse, Cummin, 
Horitaile, Fumitory. 


[PLANTS and TREES.] Tamarisk, Savine, Sene, Capers, Rue or Hearbgrice, 
Polipody, Willow or Sallow Tree, Yew-tree, Cypress tree, Hemp, Pine-tree. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


60 


[BEASTS, &c.] The Asse, Cat Hare, Mouse, Mole, Elephant, Beare, Dog, Wolf, 
Bastlisk, Crocodile, Scoprion, Toad, Serpent, Adder, Hog, all manner of creeping 
Creatures breeding of putrification, either in the Earth, Water or Ruines of Houses. 


[FISHES, BIRDS, &c.] The Eele, Tortoise, Shel-fishes. The Bat or Blude-black, Crow, 
Lapwing, Owle, Gnat, Crane, Peacock, Grashopper, Thrush, Blackbird, Ostritch, 
Cuckoo. 


[PLACES.] He delights in Deserts, Woods, obscure Vallies, Caves, Dens, Holes, 
Mountaines, or where men have been buried, Church-yards, &c. Ruinous Buildings, 
Cole-mines, Sinks, Dirty or Stinking Muddy Places, Wells and Houses of Offices, &c. 


[MINERALS.] He ruleth over Lead, the Lead-stone, the Drosse of all Mettals, as also , 
the Dust and Rubbidge of every thing. 


[STONES.) Saphire, Lapis Lazuli, all black, ugly Country Stones not polishable, and 
of a sad ashy or black colour. 


[WEATHER.] He causeth Cloudy, Dark, obscure Ayre, cold and hurtfull, thich, black 
and cadense Clouds: but of this more particularly in a Treatise by it self. 


[WINDS.] He delighteth in the East quarter of Heaven, and causeth Eastern Winds, at 
the time of gathering any Planet belonging to him, the Ancients did observe to turn 
their faces towards the East in his hour, and he, if possible, in an Angle, either in the 
Ascendant, or tenth, or eleventh house, the Moon applying by a Trine or Sextile to 
him. 


[ORBE.] His Orbe is nine degrees before and after; that is,his influence begins to 
work, when either he applies, or any Planet applies to him, and is within nine degrees 
of his aspect, and from that aspect. 

[YEERS.] In Generation he ruleth the first and eighth moneth after Conception. 


The greatest yeers he signifies —— 465. 
His greater —— 57. 

His mean yeers —— 43 and a half. 

His least ———— 30. 


The meaning whereof is this; Admit we frame a new Building, 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


61 


erect a Town or City, or Family, or principality is begun when Saturn is essentially 
and accidentally strong, the Astrologer may probably conjecture the Family, 
Principality, &c. may continue 465 yeers in honour &c. without any semible alteration: 
Again, if in ones Nativity Saturn is wel dignified, is Lord of the Geniture, &c. then 
according to nature he may live 57 yeers; if he be meanly distinguished, then the 
Native but 43; if he be Lord of the Nativity, and yet weak, the child may live 30 yeers, 
hardly any more; for nature of Saturn is cold and dry, and those qualities are 
destructive to man, &c. 


As to Age, he relates to decreped old men; Fathers, Grandfathers, the like in Plants, 
Trees, and all living Creatures. 


[COUNTRIES] Late Authours say he ruleth over Bavaria, Saxony, Stiria, Romandisle, 
Ravenna, Constantia, Ingoldstad. 


[ANGEL] Its Cassiel, alias Captiel. 


His friends are Jupiter, Sun and Mercury, his enemies Mars and Venus. 
We call Saturday his day, for then he begins to rule at Sun rise, and ruleth the first 
hour and eighth of that day. 


CHAP. IX. 


Of the Planet Jupiter, and his Signification. 


apne is placed next to Saturn (amongst the Ancients) you shal sometimes finde 
him called Zeus, or Phaeton: He is the greatest in appearance to our eyes of all 
the Planets (the Sun, Moon and Venus excepted;) 


oe MOTION.] In his Colour he is bright, dleer, and of an Azure colour. In his 
otion he exceeds Saturn, finishing his course through the twelve Signes in twelve 
yeers: his middle motion is 4 min. 59 seconds: his Diurnal motion is 8,10,12 or 14 
mm. hardly any more. 


[LATITUDE. ] His greatest North Latitude is ---- 1 38 
His greatest South Latitude is ---- 1 40 


[HOUSES.] He hath two of the twelve Signe of the Zodiack for his houses, viz. 
Sagittarius his Day-house, and Pisces his Night-house. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


62 


He receives Detriment in Gemini and Virgo. He is Exalted in Cancer, hath his Fall in 
Capricorn. 


[TRIPLICITY, TERMS] He ruleth the Fiery Triplicity by night, viz. Taurus, Leo, 
Sagattarius. He hath also these degrees allotted for his Tearmes, viz. 


In Aries, 1,2,3,4,5,6 

In Taurus, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. 

In Gemini, 8,9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 

In Cancer, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 

In Leo, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. 

In Virgo, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18. 

In Libra, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 

In Scorpio, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 

In Sagittarius, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 

In Capricorn, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19 

In Aquarius, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. 

In Pisces, 9,10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 
He hath assigned him for his Face or Decanate, 
Of Gemini, 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 
Of Leo, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
Of Libra, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 
Of Capricorn, 1,2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 
Of Pisces, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 


He is Retrograde about 120 dayes, is five days in his first station before 
retrogradation, and four dayes stationary before Direction. 


[NATURE.] He is a Diurnall, Masculine Planet, Temperately Hot and Moyst, Aiery, 
Sanguine, the greater Fortune, author of Temperance, Modesty, Sobriety, Justice. 


[MANNERS & ACTIONS WHEN WELL PLACED.] Then is he Magnanimous, 
Faithfull, Bashfull, Aspiring in an honourable way at high matters, in all his actions a 
Lover of fair Dealing, desiring to benefit all men, doing Glorious things, Honourable 
and Religious, of sweet and affable Conversation, wonderfully indulgent to his Wife 
and Children, reverencing Aged men, igen Reliever of the Poor, full of Charity and 
Godlinesse, Liberal, hating all Sordid actions, Just, Wife, Prudent, Thankfull, 
Vertuous: so that when you find 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


63 


Jupiter the significator of any man in a Question, or Lord of his Ascendant in a 
Nativity, and well dignified, you may judge him qualified as abovesaid. 


[WHEN ILL.] When Jupiter is unfortunate, then he wastes his Patrimony, suffers 
every one to cozen him, is Hypocritically Religious, Tenacious, and stiffe in 
maintaining false Tenents in Religion; he is Ignorant, Carelesse, nothing Delightfull in 
the love of his Friends; of a grosse, dull Capacity, Schismaticall, abating himself in all 
Companies, crooching and stooping where no necessity is. 


[CORPORAT.] He signifies an upright, straight and tall Stature; brown, ruddy and 
lovely Complexion; of an ovall or long Visage, and it full and fleshy; high Forehead; 
large gray Eyes; his Hair soft, and a kind of aburn brown; much Beard; a large, deep 
Belly: strong proportioned Thighs and Legs; his feet long, being the most indecent 
parts of his whole Body; in his Speech he is Sober, and of grave Discourse. 


[ORIENTALL.] The Skin more cleer, his Complexion Honey-colour, or betwixt a white 
and red, sanguine, ruddy Colour; great Eyes, the body more fleshy, usually some 
Mole or Scarre in the right Foot. 


[OCCIDENTALL.] A pure and lovely Complexion, the Stature more short, the Hair a 
light Brown, or neer a dark Flaxen; smooth, bald about the Temple or Forehead. 


[MEN & THEIR QUALITY IN GENERALL.] He signifies Judges, Senators, 
Councellours, Ecclesiasticall men, Bishops, Priests, Ministers, Cardinals, 
Chancellours, Doctors of the Civill Law, young Schollers and Students in an 
University or College, Lawyers. 

Clothiers, Wollen-Drapers. 


[DISEASES.] Plurisies, all Infirmities in the Liver, left Eare, Apoplexies, Inflamation of 
the Lungs, Palpitations and Trembling of the Heart, Cramps, pain in the Back-bone, 
all Diseases lying in the Vaines or Ribs, and proceeding from corruption of Blood, 
Squinzies, Windinesse, all Putrification in the Blood, or Feavers proceeding from too 
great abundance thereof. 


[SAVOURS.] He governeth the Sweet or well sented Odours; or that Odour which in 
smell is no way extream or offensive. 


[COLOURS.] Sea-green or Blew, Purple, Ash-colour, a mixt Yellow and Green. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


64 


[HEARBS & DRUGS.] Cloves and Clove-sugar, Mace, Nutmeg, Gilly-flower, the 
Straw-bury, the herb Balsam, Bettony, Centory, Flax, Ars-smart, Fumitory, Lung-wort, 
Pimpernel, Walwort, Orangy or Wild Margorane, Rubbarb, Self-heale, Borage, 
Buglosse, Wheat, Willow-hearb, Thorough-Leafe, Violets, Laskwort, Liverwort, Bazil, 
Pomergranets, Pyony, Liquorish, Mynt, Mastix, the dazy, Feversend, Saffron. 


[PLANTS & TREES.] Cherry-tree, Birch-tree, Mulberry-tree, Corall-tree, the Oae, 
Barburies, Olive, Gooseburies, Almond-tree, the Ivy, Manna, Mace, the Vine, the Fig- 
tree, the Ash, the Pear-tree, the Hazel, the Beech-tree, the Pyne, Raysons. 


[BEASTS.] The Sheep, the Heart or Stag, the Doe, the Oxe, Elephant, Dragon, 
Tyger, Unicorne, those Beasts which are Mild and Gentle, and yet of great benefit to 
Mankind, are appropriate to him. 


[BIRDS.] The Stork, the Snipe, the Lark, the Eagle, the Stock-dove, the Partridge, 
Bees, Pheasant, Peacock, the Hen. 


(FISHES.] The Dolphin, the Whale, Serpent, Sheath-fish or River Whale. 

[PLACES.] He delighteth in or neer Alters of Churches, in publick Conventions, 

Synods, Convocations, in Places neat, sweet, in Wardrobes, Courts of Justice, 

Oratorie. 

MINERAL & PRECIOUS SST Tyn. Amethist, the Saphire, the Smarage or 
mrald, Hyacinth, Topaz, Chrystal, Bezoar, Marble, and that which in England we 

call Free-stone. 


[WHEATHER.] He usually produceth serentiy, pleasant and healthful North Winds, 
and by his gentle Beams all ayes the ill weather of any former Malignant Planets. 


[WINDS.] He governeth the North Wind, that part which tendeth to the East. 
[ORBE.] His Radiation or Orbe, is nine degrees before and after any of his aspect. 


[GENERATION.] He governeth the second and tenth moneth; his proper seat in man 
is the Liver; and in the Elements he ruleth the Ayre. 


[YEERS.] His greatest yeers are 428. his greater 79. his mean 45. least 12. 


[AGE.] Men of middle age, or of a full Judgment and Discretion. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


65 


[CLIMATE.] He governeth the second Climate. 


[COUNTRIES.] Babylon, Persia, Hungaria, Spain, Cullen. 
[NUMBER.] The number of three is attributed to him. 
[ANGEL.] Zadkiel. 


[DAY OF THE WEEK.] Thursday, and rules the first hour after Sun rise, and the 
eighth; the length of the Planetary hour you must know by the rising of the Sun, and a 
Table hereafter following. 


All Planets except Mars are friends to Jupiter. In gathering any Hearb appropraited to 
Jupiter, see that he be very powerfull either in Essential or Accidental Dignities, and 
the Moon in some manner in good aspect with him, and if possible, let her be in some 
of his Dignities, &c. 


CHAP. X. 


Of the Planet MARS, and his severall significations. 


Mines doth in order succeed Jupiter, whom the Ancients sometimes called 
Mayors, Aris, Pyrois, Gradivus; he is lesse in body then Jupiter or Venus, and 
appeareth to our sight of a shining, fiery, sparkling colour, he finisheth his course in 
the Zodiack in one yeer 321 dayes, or thereabouts; his greatest latitude North is 4, 31 
min. his South is 6 degr. and 47. [COLOUR IN THE ELEMENT & LATITUDE.] 


[MOTION.] His mean motion is 31 min. 27 seconds. His diurnall motion is sometimes 
32. 34. 36. 38. 40. 44. min. a day, seldom more. 


He hath Aries for his Day-house, and Scorpio for his Night-house; he is exalted in 28 
degr. of Capricorn, and is depressed in 28 Cancer, he receiveth detriment in Libra 
and Taurus; he is retrograde 80 dayes; stationary before direction two dayes; after, 
but one day. 


[TRIPLICITY & TERMS.] He governeth wholly the Watry Triplicity, viz. Canser, 


Scorpio, Pisces. In the whole twelve Signs, Ptolomy assigneth him these degrees for 
Terms, viz. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


66 


In ARIES, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. 

In TAURUS, 27, 28, 29, 30. 

In GEMINI, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 

In CANCER, Wyk ayy 

In LEO, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 

In VIRGO, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 
In LIBRA, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 
In SCORPIO, 1, om 3, 4, 5, 6. 

In SAGITTARIUS, 26, 27. 28, 29, 30. 

In CAPRICORN, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25. 
In AQUAIRUS, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 

In PISCES, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25,26. 


He hath allotted him for his Face these degrees. 


In ARIES, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 
In GEMINI, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
In LEO, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 
In SCORPIO, 1,2,3,4,5,6, 7, 8,9, 10. 
In CAPRICORN, 11, 12, 13, 14; 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
In PISCES, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 


eee He is Masculine, Nocturnall Planet, in nature hot and dry, cholerick and 
iery, the lesser Infortune, author of Quarrels, Strifes, Contentions. 


[MANNERS WHEN WELL DIGNIFIED.] In feats of Warre and Courage invincible, 
scourning any should exceed him, subject to no Reason, Bold, Confident, 
Immoveable, Contentious, challenging all Honour to thenselves, Valiant, lovers of 
Warre and things pertaining thereunto, hazarding himself to all Perils, willingly will 
obey no body; nor submit to any, a large reporter of his own Acts, one that fights all 
things in comparison of Victory, and yet of prudent behaviour in his own affaires. 


ae ILL PLACED.] Then he is Pratler without modesty or honesty, a lover of 
laughter and Quarrels, Murder, Theevery, a promoter of Sedition, Frayes and 
Commotions; and Highway-Theef, as wavering as the Wind, a Traytor, of turbulent 
Spirit, Perjurer, Obscene, Rash, Inhumane, neither fearing God or caring for man, 
Unthankful, Trecherous, Oppressors, Ravenous, Cheater, Furious, Violent. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


67 


[CORPORATURE.] Generally Martialists have this forme; they are but middle 
Stature, their Bodies strong, and their Bones big, rather leane then fat; their 
Complexion of a brown, ruddy colour, or of an high colour, their Visage round, their 
Haire red of sandy flaxen, and many times crisping or curling, sharp hazle Eyes, and 
they piercing, a bold confident countence, and the man active and fearlesse. 


[ORIENTALL.] When Mars is Orientall, he signifies Valiant men, some white mixed 
with the rednesse, a decent talnesse of Body, hairy of his Body. 


[OCCIDENTALL.] Very ruddy Complexion’d, but mean in Stature, little Head, a 
smooth Body, and not hairy; yellow Hair, stiffe, the natural humours generally more 
dry. 


[QUALITIES OF MEN AND PROFESSION.] Princes Ruling by Tyranny and 
Opression, or Tyrants, Usurpers, new Conquerours. 

Generals of Armies, Colonels, Captaines, or any Souldiers having command in 
Armies, all manner of Souldiers, Physitians, Apothecaries, Chirurgions, Alchimists, 
Gunners, Butchers, Marshals, Sergeants, Bailiffs, Hang-men, Theeves, Smiths, 
Bakers, Armourers, Watch-makers, Botchers, Tailors, Cutlers of Swords and Knives, 
Barbers, Dyers, Cooks, Carpenters, Gamesters, Bear-wards, Tanners, Carriers. 


[DISEASES.] The Gall, the left Eare, tertian Feavers, pestilent burning Feavers, 
Megrams in the Head, Carbunckles, the Plague and all Plague-sores, Burnings, 
Ring-wormes, Blisters Phrensies, mad sudden distempers in the Head, Yellow- 
jaundies, Bloody-flux, Fistulaes, all Wounds and Diseases in mens Genitories, the 
Stone both in the Reins and Bladder, Scars or smal Pocks in the Face, all hurts by 
lron, the Shingles, and such other Diseases as arise by abundance of too much 
Choller, Anger or Passion. 


[COLOUR AND SAVOURS.] He delighteth in Red colour, or yellow, fiery and 
shinning like Saffron; and in those Savours which are bitter, sharp and burn the 
Tongue; of Humours, Choller. 


[HEARBS.] The Hearbs which we attribute to Mars are such as come near to a 
rednesse, whose leaves are pointed and sharp, whose taste is costick and burning, 
love to grow on dry places, are corosive and penetrating the Flesh and Bones with a 
most subtil heat: They are as followeth. The Nettle, all manner of 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


68 


Thistles, Rest-harrow or Cammock, Devils-milk or Petty spurge, the white and red 
Brambles, the white called vulgarly by the Hearbalists Ramme, Lingwort, Onion, 
Scommony, Garlick, Mustard-seed, Pepper, Ginger, Leeks, Ditander, Hore-hound, 
Hemlock, red Sanders, Tamarindes, all Hearbs attracting or drawing choller by 
Sympathy, Raddish, Castoreum, Arsolarr, Assarum, Carduus, Benedictus, 
Cantharides. 


[TREES.] All Trees which are prickly, as the Thorn, Chestnut. 

[BEASTS AND ANIMALS.] Panther, Tyger, Mastiffe, Vulture, Fox; of living 
creatures, those that are Warlike, Ravenous and Bold, the Castor, Horse, Mule, 
Ostrich, the Goat, the Wolf, the Leopard, the wild Asse, the Gnats, Flyes, Lapwing, 
Cockarrice, the Griffon, Bear. 


[FISHES.] The Pike, the Shark. the Barbel, the Fork-fish, all stinking Worms, 
Scorpions. 


[BIRDS.] The Hawke, the Vultur, the Kite or Glead, (all ravenous Fowle) the 
Raven, Cormorant, the Owle, (some say the Eagle) the Crow, the Pye. 


[PLACES.] Smiths, Shops, Furnaces, Slaughter-houses, places where Bricks or 
Charcoales are burned, or have been burnes, Chimneys, Forges. 


[MINERALS.] Iron, Antimony, Arsenick, Brimston, Ocre. 


[STONES.] Adamant, Loadstone, Blood-stone, Jasper, the many coloured 
Amatheist, the Touch-stone, red Lead or Vermilion. 


[WEATHER] Red Clouds, Thunder, Lightning, Fiery impressions, and pestilent 
Aires, which usually appear after a long time of drinesse and fair Wheather, by 
improper and unwholesome Mysts. 

[WINDS.] He stirreth up the Western Winds. 

[ORBE.] His Orbe is onely seven degrees before and after any of his aspects. 
[YEERS.] In man he governeth the flourishing time of Youth, and 

from 41 to 56; his greatest yeers are 264, greater 66, mean 40, 

lesse 15. 


[COUNTRIES.] Saromatia, Lumbardy, Batavia, Ferraria, Gothland, and the third 
Climate. 


[DAY OF THE WEEK.] He governeth Tuesday, and therein the first hour and 
eighth from Sun rise, and in Conception the third moneth. 


[ANGEL.] Samael. His friends are onely Venus; Enemies all the other Planets. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


69 


CHAP. XI. 


Of the SUN, his generall and particular significations. 


[SOL.] The Sun is placed in the middle of all Planets, and is called amongst the 
Ancients, both Poets and Historians, Sol, Titan, llioa, Phebus, Apollo, Pean, Osyris, 
Diespiter: It’s needlesse to mention his Colour, being so continuallly visible to all 
mortal men: He passeth through all the twelve Signs of the Zodiack in one yeer, or 
365 dayes and certain hours: 


[MOTION.] His mean motion is 59 min 8 seconds, yet his diurnal motion is 
sometimes 57m 16 seconds, sometimes more, never exceeding 61 minutes and six 
seconds. He always moves in the Ecliptick, and is ever voyd of latitude, so that it is 
very improper in any Astrologian to speak of the Sun his latitude. 


[HOUSE.] He hath onely the Sign of Leo for his House, and Aquarius for his 
Detriment. He is Exalted in the 19 degree of Aries, and receives his Fal in 19 Libra. 


[TRIPLICITY.] The Sun governeth the fiery Triplicity, viz. Aries, Leo, Sagittarius by 
day. 

[TERMS.] He hath no degrees of the twelve Signes admitted him for his Terms, 
though some affirm, if he be in the six Northern Signs, viz. Aries, Taurus, Gemini, 


Cancer, Leo, Virgo, he shal be said to be in his Terms, but because there is no 
reason for it, | leave it as Idle. 


In the twelve Signs he hath these degrees for his Decanate or Faces. 


In ARIES, the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
In GEMINI, the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 
In VIRGO, the 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 

In SCORPIO, the 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
In CAPRICORN, the 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 


The Sun is alwayes direct, and never can be said to be Retrograde, it’s true, he 
moveth more slowly at one time then another. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


70 


[NATURE.] He is naturally Hot, Dry, but more temperate then Mars; is a Masculine, 
Diurnall Planet, Equivalent, if well dignified to a Fortune. 


[MANNERS WHEN WELL DIGNIFIED.] Very faithfull, keeping their promises with all 
puncutuality, a kind of itching desire to Rule and Sway where he comes: Prudent, 
and of incomparable Judgment; of great Majesty and Statelinesse, Industrious to 
acquire Honour and a large Patrimony, yet as willingly departing therewith again; the 
Solar man usually speaks deliberately, but not many words, and those with great 
confidence and command of his own affection; full of Thought, Secret, Trusty, pseaks 
deliberately, and nothwithstanding his great Heart, yet is he Affable, Tractable, and 
very humane to all people, one loving Sumptuousnesse and Magnificence, and 
whatever is honourable; no sordid thoughts can enter his heart, &c. 


[WHEN ILL DIGNIFIED.] Then the Solar man is Arrogant and Proud, disdaining all 
men, cracking of his Pedegree, he is Pur-blind in Sight and Judgment, restlesse, 
troublesome, domineerning; a meer vapour, expensive, foolish, endued with no 
gravity in words, or sobernesse in Actions, a Spend-thrift, wasting his Patrimony, and 
hanging after an other mens charity, yet thinks all men are bound to him, because a 
Gentleman borne. 


[CORPORATURE.] Usually the Sun presents a man of a good, large and strong 
Corporature, a yellow, saffron Complexion, a round, large Forehead: goggle Eyes or 
large, sharp and piercing; a Body strong and well composed, not so beautifull as 
lovely, full of health, their hair yellowish, and thereofre quickly bald, much Hair on 
their Beard, and usually an high ruddy Complexion, and their bodies fleshy, in 
conditions they are very bountifull honest, sincere, wel-minded, of great and large 
Heart, High-minded, of healthfull Constitution, very humane; yet sufficiently Spirited, 
not Loquacious. 


In the Sun, we can onely say he is Orientall in the Figure, or in the Orientall quarter of 
the Figure, or Occidentiall, &c. all other Planets are either Orientall, when they rule, 
appear before him in the morning. 


Occidentall, when they are seen above the Earth after he is set. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


71 


[QUALITY OF MEN AND THEIR PROFESSIONS.] He signifieth Kings, Princes, 
Emperours, &c. Dukes, Marquesses, Earles, Barons, Lieutenants, Deputy- 
Lieutenants of Countries, Magistrates, Gentlemen in generall, Courtiers, desirers of 
Honour and Preferment, Justices of Peace, Majors, High-Sheriffs, High-Constables, 
great Huntsmen, Lieutenants, Deputy-Lieutenants, Stewards of Noble-mens houses, 
the principall Magistrate of any City, Town, Castle or Country-Villiage, yea, though a 
petty Constable, where no better, or greater Officer is; Goldsmiths, Brasiers, 
Pewterers, Coppersmiths, Minters of Money. 


[SICKNESSE.] Pimples in the Face, Palpitation or Trembling, or any Diseases of the 
Brain or Heart, Timpanies Infirmities of the Eyes, Cramps, sudden swoonings, 
Diseases of the Mouth, and sunking Breaths, Catars, rotten Feavers; principally in 
man he governeth the Heart, the Brain and right Eye, and vitall Spirit, in Women the 
left Eye. 


[COLOURS AND SAVOURS.] Of Colours he ruleth the Yellow, the colour of Gold, 
the Scarlet or the deer Red, some say Purple: In Savours, he liketh wel a mixture of 
Sower and Sweet together, or Aromatical flavour, being a little Bitter and Stiptical, but 
withal Confortative and a little sharp. 


[HEARBS AND PLANTS.] Those Plants which are subject to the Sun doe smell 
pleasantly, are of good flavour, their Flowers are yellow or reddish, are in growth of 
Majestical form, they love open and Sunshine places, their principal Vertue is to 
strengthen the Heart, and comfort the Vitals, to deer the Eye-sight, resist Poyson, or 
to dissolve any Witchery, or Malignant Planetary Influences; and they are Saffron, the 
Lawrel, the Pomecitron, the Vine, Enula Campana, Saint Johns-wort, Ambre, Musk, 
Ginger, Hearb grace, Balm, Marigold, Rosemary, Rosafolis, Cinamon, Celendine, 
Eye-bright, Pyony, Barley, Cinquefoile, Spikenard, Lignum Aloes, Arsnick. 


[TREES.] Ash-tree, Palm, Lawrel-tree, the Myrrhe-tree, Frankinsence, the Cane-tree 
or Planet, the Cedar, Heletrepion, the Orange and Lemmon-tree. 


[BEASTS.] The Lyon, the Horse, the Ram, the Crocodile, the Bul, Goat, Night- 
wormes or Glow-wormes. 


[FISHES.] The Sea-Calf or Sea-Fox, the Crabfish, the Starfish. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


72 


[BIRDS.] The Eagle, the Cock, the Phoenix, Nightingale, Peacock, the Swan, the 
Buzzard, the Slye Cantharis, the Goshawke. 


[PLACES.] Houses, Courts of Princes, Pallaces, Theators, all magnificent Structures 
being clear and decent, Hals, DiningRooms. 


[MINERALS OR METTALS.] Amongst the Elements Sun Hath domination of fire and 
deer shining flames, over mettals, he ruleth Gold. 


[STONES.] The Hyacinth, Chrisolite, Adamant, Carbuncle, the Etites stone found in 
Eagles nests, the Pantaure, if such a stone be the Ruby. 


[WEATHER.] He produceth wheather according to the season; in the spring gentle 
moysting Showers; in the Summer heat in extremity if with Mars; in Autumn mists; in 
Winter small Rain. 


[WINDS.] He loves the East part of the World; and that winde which proceeds from 
that quarter. 


[ORBE.] Is 15. degrees before any aspect; and so many after seperation. 


[YEERS.] In age he ruleth youth, or when one is at the strongest; his greatest yeers 
are 1460, greater 120, mean 69, least 19. 


[COUNTRIES.] Italy, Sicilia, Bohemia; and the fourth Climate, Phenicia, Chaldea. 
[ANGEL.] Michael. 


[DAY OF THE WEEK.] He ruleth Sunday the first hour thereof, and the eight; and in 
numbers the first and fourth; and in conceptions the fourth moneth. His friends are all 
the Planets except Saturn, who is his Enemy. 


CHAP. XIl. 
Of the Planet VENUS and her severall significations and nature. 

[NAME.] After the Sun succeedeth Venus; who is sometimes called Cytherea, 
Aphrodite, Phosphoros, Vesperugo, Ericina. 

[COLOUR IN THE ELEMENT.] She is a bright shining colour, and is well known 
amongst the vulgar by the name of the evening Starre or Hesperus; and that is when 
she appeares after the Sun is set: common people call he the morning Starre, and 
the learned Lucifer, when she is seen long before the rising of the Sun. 


[MOTION.] Her mean motion is 59 min. and 8 seconds: her diurnall motion is 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


73 


sometimes 62 min. a day 64.65.66.or 70.74.76. minutes; but 82 min. she never 
exceedeth. 


[LATITUDE.] Her greatest North or South latitude is 9 degr. and two min. In February 
1643. she had eight degr. and 36 min. for her North latitude. 


[HOUSES.] She hath Taurus and Libra for her houses, she is exalted in 27 Pisces, 
she receiveth detriment In Aries and Scorpio, and hath her fal In 27 Virgo. 


[TRIPLICITY.] She governeth the Earthly Triplicity by day viz. Taurus, Virgo, 
Capricorn; she is two dayes stationary before retrogradatlon, and so many before 
direction, and doth usually continue retrograde 42 dayes. 


[HER TERMS.] She hath these degrees in every Sign for her Terms. 


In ARIES, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14 
In TAURUS, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 
In GEMINI, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
In CANCER, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27 
In LEO, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19. 
In VIRGO, 8,9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 
In LIBRA, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. 
In SCORPIO, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 
In SAGITTARIUS, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. 
In CAPRICORN, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. 
In AQUARIUS, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 
In PISCES, 1, 2,3, 4,5, 6, 7,8 
These degrees are allowed for her Face. 
In ARIES, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 
In CANCER, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 
In VIRGO, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, .18, 19, 20. 
In SCORPIO, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 
In PISCES, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 


[ELEMENT, NATURE.] She Is a Feminine Planet, temperately Cold and Moyst, 
Nocturnal, the lesser Fortune, author of Mirth and Jolity; the elements, the Ayre and 
Water are Venerial; In the Humours, Flegme with Blood, with Spirit, and Genital seed. 


[MANNERS & LOVING QUALITY WHEN MIRTH, WELL PLACED.] She signifies a 


quiet man, not given to Law, Quarrel or Wrangling, not Vitlous, Pleasant, Neat and 
Spruce, loving Mirth 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


74 


in his words and actions, cleanly in Apparel, rather Drinking much then Gluttonous, 
prone to Venery, oft entangles in Love-matters, Zealous in their affections, Musical, 
delighting in Baths, and all honest merry Meetings, or Maskes and Stage-playes, 
easie of Belief, and not given to Labour, or take any Pains, a Company-keeper, 
Cheerful, nothing Mistrustful, a right vertuous Man or Woman, oft had in some 
Jealousie, yet no cause for it. 


[WHEN ILL.] Then he is Riotous, Expensive, wholly given to Loosenesse and Lewd 
companies of Women, nothing regarding his Reputation, coveting unlawful Beds, 
Incestuous, an Adulterer; Fennatical, a meer Skip-jack, of no Faith, no Repute, no 
Credit; spending his Means in Ale-houses, Taverns, and amongst Scandalous, Loose 
people; a meen Lazy companion, nothing careful of the the things of this Life, or any 
thing Religious; a meer Atheist and natural man. 


[CORPORATURE.] A man of fair, but not tall Stature, his Complexion, being white, 
tending to a little darknesse, which makes him more Lovely; very fair Lovely Eyes, 
and a little black; a round Face, and not large, fair Hair, smooth, and plenty of it, and 
it usually of a light brown colour, a lovely Mouth and cherry Lips, the Face pretty 
fleshy, a rolling sae Eye, a Body very delightful, Lovely and exceeding wel 
shaped, one desirous of Trimming and making himself neat and compleat both in 
Cloaths and Body, a love dimple in his Cheeks, a stedfast Eye, and ful amarous 
enticements. 


[ORIENTALL.] When Orientall the Body inclines to talnesse; or a kind of upright 
straightnesse in Person, not corpulent or very tal, but neatly composed. A right 
Venerian person, is such as we Say, is a pretty, compleat, handsome Man or 
Woman. 


[OCCIDENTALL.] When she is Occidental, the Man is of more short stature, yet very 
decent and comely in Shape and Form, wel liked of all. 


[QUALITIES OF MEN & THEIR PROFESSIONS.] Musitions, Gamesters, Silk-men, 
Mercers, Linnen-Drapers, Painters, Jewellers, Hig te Lapidaries, Embroiderers, 
Women-tailors, Wives, Mothers, Virgins, Choristers, Fidlers, Pipers, when joyned with 
Moon, Singers, Perfumers, Semi lers, Picture-drawers, Gravers, Upholdsters, 
Limners, Glovers, all such as 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


75 


sell those Commodities which adorn Women either, in Body (as Cloaths) or in Face, 
(as Complexion-waters.) 


[SICKNESSE.] Diseases by her signified, are principally in the Matrix and members 
of Generation; in the reines, belly, back, navil and those parts; the Genorrex or 
running of the Reines, French or Spanish Pox; any disease arising by inordinate lust. 
Priapisme, impotency in generation, Hernias & the Diabetes or pissing disease. 


[SAVOURS AND COLOURS.] In colours she signifieth White, or milky Skie colour 
mixed with brown, or a little Green. In Savours she delightes in that which is pleasant 
and toothsome; usually in moyst and sweet, or what is very delectable; in smels what 
is unctious and Aromatical, and incites to wantonnesse. 


[HEARBS AND PLANTS.] Myrtle always green; all hearbs which she governeth have 
a sweet flavour, a pleasant smel; a white flower; of a gentle humour, whose leaves 
are smooth and not jagged. She governeth the Lilly white and yellow, and the Lilly of 
the Valley, and of the Water. The Satyrion or Cuckoe-pintle, Maidenhair, Violet; the 
white and yellow Daffadil. 


[TREES.] Sweet Apples, the white Rose, the Fig, the white Sycamore; wilde Ash, 
Turpentine-tree, Olive, Sweet Oranges, Mugwort, —_Ladies-mantle, Sanicle-Baim, 
Veryin, Walnuts, Almonds, Millet, Valerian, Thyme, Ambre, Ladanum, Civet or Musk, 
Corriander, French Wheat, Peaches, Apricocks, Plums, Raisons. 


[BEASTS.] The Hart, the Panther, smal cattle, Coney, the Calf, the Goat. 
[BIRDS.] Stockdove, Wagtayle, the Sparrow, Hen, the Nightingale, the Thrush, 


Pellican, Partridge, Ficedula, a little Bird Feeding on Grapes; the Wren, Eagles, the 
Swan, the Swallow, the Owse or Black Bird, the Pye. 


[FISHES.] The Dolphin. 


een Gardens, Fountains, Bride-chambers, fair lodgings, Beds, Hangings, 
ancing-Schooles, Wardrobes. 


[METALS AND MINERALS, STONES.] Copper, especially the Corinthian and White; 


Brasse, all Lattenware. Cornelian, the sky-colour'd Saphyre, white and red Coral, 
Margalite, Alabaster, Lapis Luzuli because It expels Melancholy, the Beril, Chrisolite. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


76 


[WINDE AND WEATHER.] She governeth the South-winde being hot and moyst; in 
the temperament of the Ayre, she ruleth the Etesiae; she foretelleth in Summer, 
Serenity or cleer weather; in Winter, rain or snow. 


[ORB.] Her Orbe is 7. before and after any aspect of hers. 


[YEERS.] Her greatest yeers are 151. her greater 82. her mean 45. her least 8. In 
man she governeth Youth from 14 to 28. 


[COUNTRIES.] Arabia, Austria, Campania, Vienna, Polonia the greater, Turing, 
Parthia, Media, Cypress, and the six climate. 


[ANGEL.] Her Angel is Anael. 


[DAY OF THE WEEK.] Her day of the week Friday, of which she rules the first and 
eigth houre; and in conception the first Month. Her Friends are all the Planets except 
Saturn. 


CHAP. XiIll. 


Of MERCURY, and his signification, nature and property. 


[NAME.] He is called Hermes, Stilbon, Cyllenius, Archas. Mercury is the least of all 
the Planets, never distant from the Sun above 27.degrees; by which reason he is 
seldom visible to our sight: 


[COLOUR.] He is of a dusky silver colour; his mean motion is 59 min. and 8 seconds; 
but he is sometimes so swift that he moveth one degree and 40.min. in a day, never 
more; so that you are not to marvaile if you finde him sometimes goe 66. 68. 70. 80. 
86. or 100. in a day: he is Stationary one day, and retrograde 24.dayes. 


[LATITUDE.] His greatest South Latitude is 3. degr. 35.min. His greatest North Laitit. 
is 3.deg. 33.min. 


Gee He hath Gemini and Virgo for his Houses, and is exalted in the 15. of 
irgo: he receives detriment in Sagittarius and Pisces, his fal is in Pisces. 


[TRIPLICITY.] He ruleth the aery triplicity by night, viz. Gemini, Libra, Aquarius. 
[TERMS.] He hath these degrees in every Sign for his Terms. 


In ARIES, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21 
In TAURUS, 9,10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15. 
INGEMINI, T5225 ay My On Oy Te 

In CANCER, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20 
In LEO, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. 

In VIRGO, 1, 2,3, 4, 5, 6, 7 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


77 


In LIBRA, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 
In SCORPIO, 22, Oo, 24; 20s CO, ef 
In SAGITTARIUS, 15, 16, 17 18, 13,20. 
In CAPRICORN, 4G, 9, 10,11, 12. 
In AQUARIUS, 7,,0,.0.-10, 11,12. 
In PISCES, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 


[FACE.] These subsequent degrees are his Faces or Decanate: 


In TAURUS, Wey Oy My, Oy Sp Lg Oy Oy 10s 
In CANCER, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
In VIRGO, 21, 22, Poy Oy 2D, COp2 1 2G, Cog OUs 
In SAGITTARIUS, 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 
In AQUARIUS, 11, 12. 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 


[NATURE.] We may not call him either Masculine or Feminine, for he is either the 

one or other as joyned to any Planet; for if in Conjunction with a Masculine Planet, he 

becomes Masculine; if with a Feminine, then Feminine, but of his own nature he is 

he anes and therefore Melancholly; with the good he is good, with the evil 
anets ill: 


[ELEMENTS.] In the Elements the Water; amongst the humours, the mixt, he rules 
the animal spirit: he is author of subtilty, tricks, devices, perjury, &c. 


[MANNERS WHEN WELL PLACED.] Being wel dignified, he represents a man of a 
subtil and politick brain, intellect, and cogitation; an excellent disputant or Logician, 
arguing with learning and discretion, and using much eloquence in his speech, a 
searcher into all kinds of Mysteries and Learning, sharp and witty, learning almost 
any thing without a Teacher; ambitious of being exquisite in every Science, desirious 
naturally of travel and seeing foraign parts: a man of an unwearied fancy, curious in 
the search of any occult knowledge; able by his own Genius to produce wonders; 
given to Divination and the more secret knowledge; if he turn Merchant, no man 
exceeds him in a way of Trade or invention of new wayes whereby to obtain wealth. 


[MANNERS, WHEN ILL PLACED OR DIGNIFIED.] A troublesome wit, a kinde of 
Phrenetick man, his tongue and Pen against every man, wholly bent to spoil his 
estate and time in prating and trying nice conclusions to no purpose; a great lyar, 
boaster, pratler, busibody, false, a tale-carrier, given to wicked Arts, as Necromancy, 
and such like ungodly 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


78 


knowledges; easie of beleefe, an asse or very ideot, constant in no place or opinion, 
cheating and theeving every where; a news-monger, pretending all manner of 
knowledge, but guilty of no true or solid learning; a trifler; a meer frantick fellow; if he 
prove a Divine, then a meer verball fellow, frothy of no judgment, easily perverted, 
constant in nothing but idle words and bragging. 


[CORPORATURE,] Vulgarly he denotes one of an high stature and straight thin 
spare body, an high forehead and somewhat narrow long face, long nose; fair eyes, 
neither perfectly black or gray, thin lips and nose, little hair on the chin, but much on 
his head, and it a sad brown inclining to blacknesse; long arms, fingers and hands; 
his complexion like an Olive or Chestnut colour. You must more observe Mercury 
then all the Planets; for having any aspect to a Planet, he doth more usually partake 
of the influence of that Planet then nay other doth: if with Saturn then heavy, with 
Jupiter more temperate, with Mars more rash, with Sun more genteele, with Venus 
more jesting, with Moon more shifter. 


[ORIENTALL.] When he is Orientall, his complexion is honey colour, or like one wel 
Sun-burnt; in the stature of his body not very high, but wel joynted, smal eyes, not 
much hair; in very truth, according to the the height of body, very wel composed, but 
stil a defect in the complexion, viz. swarty brown, and in the tongue, viz, all for his 
own ends. 


[OCCIDENTALL.] When Occidentall, a tawny visage, lank body, small slender limbs, 
ad eyes, and sparkling and red or fiery; the whole frame of body inclining to 
rinesse. 


[QUALITY OF MEN AND PROFESSIONS.] He generally signifies all literated men, 
Philosophers, Mathematicians, Astrologians, Merchants, Secretaries, Scriveners, 
Diviners, Sculptors, Poets, Orators, Advocates, School-masters, Stationers, Printers, 
Exchangers of Money, Atturneys, Emperours, Embassadours, Commissioners, 
Clerks, Artificers, generally Accomptants, Solicitors, sometimes Theeves, pratling 
muddy Ministers, busie Sectaries, and they unlearned; Gramarians, Taylors, Carriers, 
Messengers, Foot-men, Userers. 


[SICKNESSE.] All Vertigo’s, Lethargies or giddinesse in the Head, Madnesse, either 
Lightnesse, or any Disease of the Brain; Ptisick, all 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


79 


stammering and imperfection in the Tongue, vein and fond Imaginations, all defects 
in the Memory, Hoarcenesse, dry Coughs, too much abundance of Spettle, all 
snaffling and snuffling in the Head or Nose; the Hand and Feet Gout, Dumnesse, 
Toungue-evil, all evils in the Fancy and intellectual parts. 


[COLOURS AND SAVIOURS.] Mixed and new colours, the Gray mixed with Sky- 
colour, such as is on the Neck of the Stock-dove, Linsie-woolsie colours, or 
consisting of many colours mixed in one. Of Saviours an hodge-podge of all things 
together, so that no one can give it any true name; yet usually such as doe quicken 
the Spirits, are subtil and penetrate, and in a manner insensible. 


[HEARBS AND PLANTS.] Herbs attributed to Mercury, are known by the various 
colour of the flower, and love sandy barren places, they bear their seed in husks or 
cobs, they smel rarely or subtilly, and have pricnipal relation to the tongue, brain, 
lungs or memory; they dispel winde, and comfort the Annimal spirits, and open 
obstructions. Beanes, three leaved grasse, the Walnut and Walnut-tree; the Filbert- 
tree and Nut; the Elder-tree, Adders tongue, Dragon-wort, Twopenny-grasse, 
Lungwort, Anniseeds, Cubebs, Marjoran. What hearbs are used for the Muses and 
Divination, as Vervine, the Reed; of Drugs, Treacle, Hiera, Diambra. 


[BEASTS.] The Hyaena, Ape, Fox, Squirrel, Weasel, the Spider, the Grayhound, the 
Hermophradite, being partaker of both sexes; all cunning creatures. 


[BIRDS.] The Lynnet, the Parrot, the Popinian, the Swallow, the Pye, the Beetle, 
Pifinires, Locusts, Bees, Serpent, the Crane. 


[FISHES.] The Forke-fish, Mullet. 


[PLACES.] Tradesmens-shops, Markets, Fayres, Schooles, CommonHals, Bowling- 
Allyes, Ordinaries, Tennis-Courts: 


[MINERALS.] Quicksilver. 


[STONES.] The Milestone, Marchasite or fire-stone, the Achates, Topaz, Vitriol, all 
stones of divers colours. 


[WINDS AND WEATHER.] He delights in Windy, Stormy and Violent, Boistrous 
Weather, and stirs up that Wind which the Planet signifies to which he applyes; 
sometimes Rain, at other times Haile, Lightning, Thunder and Tempests, in hot 
Countries Earthquakes, but this 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


80 


must be observed really from the Sign and Season of the year. 
[ORBE.] His Orbe is seven degrees before and after any aspect. 


[YEERS.] His greatest yeers are 450; his greatest 76; his mean 48; his little or least 
20: in Conceptions he governeth the sixth moneth. 


[COUNTRIES.] He hath Grecia, Flanders, AEgypt, Paris. 
[ANGEL.] His Angel is named Raphael. 


[DAY OF THE WEEK.] He governeth Wednesday, the first hour thereof, and the 
eight. His Friends are Jupiter, Venus, Saturn and his Enemies all the other Planets. 


CHAP. XIlll. 


Of the MOON her properties and significations. 


[NAME.] The Moon we find called by the Ancients, Lucina, Cynthia, Diana, Phoebe, 
Latona, Noctiluca, Prosperpina; she is neerest to the Earth of all the Planets; her 
colour in the Element is vulgarly knowne: 


[MOTION.] she finisheth her courte through the whole twelve Signs in 27 days, 7 
hours and 43 min. or thereabouts: her mean motion is 13 degr. 10 min. and 36 
seconds, but she moveth sometimes lesse and sometimes more, never exceeding 15 
degr. and two min. in 24 hours space. 


[LATITUDE.] Her greatest North Latitude is 5 degr. and 17 min.(or thereabouts) Her 
greatest South Latitude is 5 degr. and 12 rn-in. (or thereabouts) She is never 
Retrograde, but always direct; when she is slow in motion, and goeth lesse in 24 
hours then 13 degr. and 10 min. she is then equivalent to a Retrograde Planet. 


[HOUSE.] She hath the Sign Cancer for her house, and Capricorn for her detriment; 
she is exalted in 3. Taurus, and hath her fal in 3 grad. Scorpio; she governeth the 
Earthly Triplicity by night, viz. Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn. 

[TRIPLICITY.] The Sun and she have no Terms assigned them. 


In the twelve Signs she hath these degrees for her 
Decanate or Face. 


In TAURUS, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
In CANCER, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


81 


In LIBRA, 1, 2,3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. 
InN SAGITTARIUS, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20. 
In AQUARIUS, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 30. 


[NATURE.] She is Feminine, Nocturnal Planet, Cold, Moyst and Flegmatique. 


[MANNERS OR ACTIONS WHEN WELL PLACED OR DIGNIFIED.] She signifieth 
one of composed Manners, a soft, tender creature, a Lover of all honest and 
ingenuous Sciences, a Searcher of, and Delighter in Novelties, naturally propense to 
frit and shift his Habitation, unstedfast, wholly caring for the present Times, Timorous, 
Prodigal, and easily Frighted, however loving Peace, and to live free from the cares 
of this Life, if a Mechannick, the man learnes many Occupations, and frequently wil 
be tampering with many wayes to trade in. 


[WHEN ILL. ] A meer Vagabond, idle Person, hating Labour, a Drunkard, a Sot, one 
of no Spirit or Forecast, delighting to live beggarly and carefly, one content in no 
condition of Life, either good or ii. 


[CORPORATURE.] She generally presenteth a man of fair stature, whitely coloured, 
the Face round, gray Eyes, and a little louring; much Hair both on the Head, Face, 
and other parts; usually one Eye a little larger then the other; short Hands and fleshy, 
the whole Body inclining to be fleshy, plump, corpulent and flegmatique: if she be 
impedited of the Sun in a Nativity or Question, she usually signifies some blemish in, 
or neer the Eye: a blemish neer the Eye, if she be impedited in Succedant Houses; in 
the Sight, if she be unfortunate in Angles and with fixed Starres, called Nebulosae. 


[QUALITIES OF MEN AND WOMEN] She signifieth Queens, Countesses, Ladies, all 
manner of Women; as also the common People, Travellers, Pilgrims, Sailors, 
Fishermen, Fish-mongers, Brewers, Tapsters, Vintners, Letter-carriers, Coach-men, 
Hunts-men, Messengers, (some say the Popes Legats) Marriners, Millers, Ale wives, 
Maistors, Drunkards, Oister-wives, Fisher-women, Chare-women, Tripe-women, and 
generally such Women as carry Commodities in the Streets; as also, Midwives, 
Nurses, &c, Hackney-men, Water-men, Water-bearers. 


[SICKNESSE.] Apoplexies, Palsie, the Chollick, the Belly-ake, 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


82 


Disease in the Left Side, Stones, the Bladder and members of Generation, the Men- 
stries and Liver: in Women Dropsies, Fluxes of Belly, all cold Rneumatick Diseases, 
cold Stomack, the Gout in the Rists and Feet, Sciatica, Chollick, Worms in Children 
and men, Rheumes or Hutts in the Eyes, viz, in the Left of Men, and Right of Women: 
Sursets, rotten Coughs, Convultion fits, the Falling sicknesse, Kings-evil, Apostems, 
smal Pox and Measels 


[COLOURS AND SAVIOURS.] Of Colours the White, or pale Yellowish White, pale 
Green, or a little of the Silver colour. Of Saviours, the Fresh, or without any flavour, 
such as is in Hearbs before they be ripe, or such as doe moysten the Brain, &c. 


[HEARBS, PLANTS AND TREES.] Those Hearbs which are subject to the Moon 
have soft and thick juicy leaves, of a waterish or a little sweetish taste, they love to 
grow in watry places, and grow quickly into a juicy magnitude; and are The Colwort, 
Cabbage, Melon, Gourd, Pompion, Onion, Mandrake, Poppy, Lettice, Rape, the 
Linden-tree, Mushroomes, Endine, all Trees or Hearbs who have round, shady, great 
spreading Leaves, and are little Fruitful. 


[BEASTS OR BIRDS.] All such Beasts, or the like, as live in the water; as Frogs, the 
Otter, Snailes, &c. the Weasel, the Cunny, all Sea Fowle, Coockoe, Geese and Duck, 
the Night-Owle. 


[FISHES.] The Oyster and Cockle, all Shel-fish, the Crab and Lobster, Tortoise, 
Eeles. 


[PLACES.] Fields, Fountains, Baths, Havens of the Sea, Highwayes and 
Desertplaces, Port Towns, Rivers, Fish-ponds, standing Pools, Boggy places, 
Common-shoars, little Brooks, Springs, Harbonrs for Ships or Docks. 

[MINERALS.] Silver. 


[STONES.] The Selenite, all soft Stons, Cristals. 


[WEATHER.] With Saturn cold Ayre; with Jupiter Serene; with Mars Winds red 
Clouds; with the Sun according to the Season; with Venus and Mercury Showres and 
Winds. 


[WINDS.] In Hermetical operation, she delighteth towards the North, and usually 


when she is the strongest Planet in the Scheam, viz. in any Lunation, she stirs up 
Wind, according to the nature of the Planet she next applies unto. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


83 


[ORBE.] Is 12. degrees before and after any Aspect. 


[YEERS.] Her greatest yeers are 320. greater 108. mean 66, least 25. in conceptions 
she ruleth the seventh moneth. 


[COUNTRIES.] Holland, Zealand, Denmarke, Norimberge, Flanders. 
[ANGEL.] Gabriel. 


[DAY OF THE WEEK.] Her day is Monday the first hour and the eight, after the rise of 
the Sun are hers. Her Enemy is Saturn, and also Mars. 


The Head of the Dragon is Masculine, of the nature of Jupiter and Venus, and of 
himself a Fortune; yet the Ancients doe say, that being in Conjunction with the good 
he is good, and in conjunction with the evil Planets they account him evil. 


The Tayle of the Dragon is Feminine by Nature, and clean contrary to the Head; for 
he is evil when joyned with good Planets, and good when in conjunction with the 
malignant Planets. This is the constant opinion of all the Ancients, but upon what 
reason grounded | know not; | ever found the North Node equivalent to either of the 
Fortunes, and when joyned with the evil Planets to lessen their malevolent 
signification; when joyned with the good to increase the good promised by them: For 
the Tayle of the Dragon, | always in my practise found when he was joyned with the 
evil Planets; their malice or the evil intended thereby was doubled and trebled, or 
extreamly augmented, &c. and when he chanced to be conjunction with any of the 
Fortunes who were significators in the question, though the matter by the principal 
significator was fairely promised, and likely to be perfected in a smal time; yet did 
there ever fal out many rubs and disturbances, much wrangling and great 
controversie, that the businesse was many times given over for desperate ere a 
perfect conclusion could be had; and unlesse the principal significators were Angular 
and wel fortified with essential dignities, many times unexpectedly the whole matter 
came to nothing. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


84 


CHAP. XV. 


Another brief Description of the Shapes and formes 
of the Planets. 


SATURN - Signifieth one of a swart colour, palish like lead, or of a black earthly 
brown; one of rough shin, thick and very hairy on the body, not great eyes, many 
times his complexion is betwixt black and yellow, or as if he had a spice of the black 
or yellow Jaundies: he is lean, crooked, or beetle-browed, a thin whay Beard, great 
lips, like the black-Moores; he lookes to the ground, is slow in motion, either is bow- 
leged, or hits one leg or knee against another; most part a stinking breath, seldom 
free from a Cough: {this is where he is peregrine or unfortunate.} he is crafty for his 
own ends, seducing people to his opinion, full of revenge and malice, little caring for 
the Church or Religion; its a foule nasty, slovenly knave, or a whore; a great eater. or 
one of a large stomack, a brawling fellow, big great shoulders, covetous, and yet 
seldom rich, &c. 


JUPITER - We must describe Jupiter and a Jovialist, to be one of a comely stature, 
full faced, full eyed, a sanguine complexion, or mixed with white and red, a large 
space betwixt his eyebrowes, usually his Beard is of a flaxen or sandy-flaxen colour: 
sometimes also when Jupiter is combust very sad or black, his hair thick, his eyes not 
black, his teeth well set, good broad teeth, but usually for some mark of difference in 
the two fore-teeth, either by their standing awry, or some blacknesse or impersection 
in them; his hair gently curls (if he be in a fiery Sign.) A man well spoken, religious, or 
at least a good morall honest man; a person comely and somewhat fat (if Jupiter be 
in moyst Signs) fleshy; if in Aery Signs, bigge and strong; if in earthly Signs, a man 
usually well descended; but if he be significator, of an ordinary clown, as sometimes 
he may be, then is he of more humanity then usually in such kinde of men. 


MARS - A Martiall Man, is many times full faced with a lively high colour like Sun- 
burnt, or like raw tanned-Leather, a fierce 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


85 


countenance, his eyes being sparkling or sharp and darting, and a yellow colour; his 
hair both of head and beard being reddish (but herein you must vary according to the 
Sign, in fiery signs and aery where Mars fals to be with fixed stars of his own nature, 
there he shews a deep sandy red colour, but in watery signs, being with fixed Starres 
of his own nature, he is of a flaxenish or whitish bright hair; if in earthly Signs, the hair 
is like a sad brown, or of a sad Chestnut colour.) He hath a marke or scar in his face, 
is broad-shouldered, a sturdy strong body, being bold and proud, given to mocke, 
scorn, quarrell, drink, game, and wench: which you may easily know by the Sign he is 
in; if in the house of Venus he wencheth, if he Mercury he steals, but if he be in his 
own house he quarrels, in Saturnes, is dogged; in the Sunnes, is lordly; in the 
Moones, is a drunkard. 


SUN - The Sun dete ee denote one of an obscure white colour mixed with red; 
a round face, and short chin, a fair stature, and one of comely body; his colour 
sometimes betwixt yellow and black, but for the mod parts more sanguin then 
otherwayes: a bold man and resolute, his hair curling; he hath a white and tender 
skin, one desirous of praise, fame and estimation amongst men; he hath a deer 
voyce and great head, his teeth somewhat distort or obliquely set, of slow speech but 
of a composed judgment; using outwardly a great decorum in his actions, but 
privately he is lascivious and inclinable to many vices. 


VENUS - Who is signified by Venus, whether Man or Woman, hath a goodly and fair 
round visage, a full eye, usually we say goggle-eyed, red ruddy lips, the neither more 
thick or bigger then the upper, the eye-lids blacke, however lovely and gracefull, the 
hair of lovely colour (but most part according to the Sign as before repeated) in some 
its cole-blacke, in others a light brown, a soft smooth hair, and the body extream well 
shaped, ever rather inclining to shortnesse than talnesse. 


MERCURY - We describe Mercury, to be a man neither white or black 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


86 


but betwixt both, of a sad brown or dark yellowish colour, long visaged, high- 
forehead, black or gray eyes, a thin long sharp nose, a thin spare beard (many times 
none at all) of an aburn sad colour next to black, slender of body, smal legs, a 
pratling busie fellow, and in walking he goes nimbly, and aiwayes would be thought 
to be ful of action. 


MOON - She by reason of her swiftnesse, varieth her shape very oft, but in the 
general, she personates one having a round visage and ful faced, in whose 
complexion you may perceive a mixture of white and red, but palenesse overcomes; 
if she be in fiery signs, the Man or Woman speeks hastily; in watery signs, he or she 
hath some freckles in his or her face, or is blub cheecked; no very handsome body, 
but a mudling creature, and unlesse very wel dignified, she ever signifies an ordinary 
vulgar person. 


The colours of the Planets and Signs. 


Saturn giveth black colour: Jupiter a colour mixed with red and green: Mars red, or 
iron colour: Sun yellow or yellow Purple: Venus white or purple colour: Mercury sky- 
colour or blewish: Moon a colour spotted with white and other moxt colours. 


Aries white mixed with red: Taurus white with Cirtine: Gemini white mixed with red: 
Cancer green or russet: Leo red or green: Virgo blacke speckled with blew: Libra 
black or dark crimson, or tawny colour: Scorpio browne: Sagittarius yellow or a 
greene sanguine: Capricorn blacke or russet, or a swart brown: Aquarius a skye- 
colour with blew: Pisces white glistering colour. 


CHAP. XVI. 


Of the twelve Signs of the Zodiack, and their 
manifold Divisions. 


a ee whole Zodiack is divided into twelve equal parts, which we call Signs, and give 
them the names of living 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


87 


Creatures, either for their properties they hold with living Creatures, or by reason of 
the situation of the Starres in those places which somewhat resemble that effigies 
and similitude of living creatures: Their names and characters follow. 


1 2 3 4 5 6 
ARIES TAURUS GEMINI CANCER LEO VIRGO 
7 8 S 10 11 12 


LIBRA SCORPIO SAGITTARIUS CAPRICORN AQUARIUS PISCES 


Every one of these Signs contains thirty degrees or parts in longitude: Hence it 
comes to passe that the whole Zodiack doth contain 360 degrees, every degree 
containes 60 minutes, which we also call scruples, every minute containes 60 
seconds, and fo further if you please, &c. but in Astrology we onely make use of 
degrees, and minutes and second. 


These Signs are again divided many wayes; as first, into four quadrants or 
quarters, answering to the four quarters of the year. The Vernal or Spring quarter, is 
sanguine, Hot and Moyst, and containes the first three Signs, viz. Aries, Taurus, 
Gemini. The Estival or Summer quarter is Hot, Dry and Cholerick, and containes the 
fourth, fifth and sixth Signs, viz. Cancer,Leo, Virgo. 


The Autumnal or Harvest quarter is Cold, Dry and Melancholly, and containes the 
seventh, eighth and ninth Signs, viz. Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius. The Hyemnal, 
Brumal or Winter quarter is Cold, Moyst and Phiegmatique, and containes the tenth, 
eleventh and twelfth Signs, viz. Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces. 


They are again divided in division of the Elements, for some Signs in nature are 
Fiery, Hot and Dry, viz. Aries, Leo, Sagittarius, and these three Signs constitute the 
Fiery Triplicity. 


Others are Dry, Cold and Earthly, viz. Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn, and make the Earthly 
Triplicity. 


Se are Aiery, Hot and Moyst, viz. Gemini, Libra, Aquarius, which make the Aiery 
riplicity. 


Others are Watry, Cold and Moyst, viz. Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces, and are called the 
Watry Triplicity. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


88 


Again, some Signs are Masculine, Diurnal, and therefore Hot, as Aries, Gemini, Leo, 
Libra, Sagittarius, Aquarius. 


Some are Feminine, Nocturnal, therefore Cold, viz. Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio, 
Capricorn, Pisces. 


The use whereof is this, That if you have a Masculine Planet in a Masculine Sign, it 
imports him or her more manly; and so if a Masculine Planet be in a Feminine Sign, 
the man or woman is lesse couragious, &c. 


Some Signs again are called Boreal, Septentrional or Northern, because they decline 
from the Equinoctial Northward, and these are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo; 
and these six Signs contain half the Zodiack, or the first semi-circle thereof. 


Some Signes are called Austral, Meridional or Southern, for that they decline 
Southward from the Equinoctial, and these are Libra, Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, 
Aquarius, Pisces. 


[MOVEABLE.] The Signs again are divided into Moveable, Fixed and Common, 
Aries, Cancer, Libra, Capricorn are called moveable and Cardinal: moveable, 
because when the Sun enters into Aries and Libra, the Weather and Season of the 
Year quickly varies and changes; they are called Cardinal, because when the Sun 
enters into any of those Signs from that time we denominate the Quarters of the yeer. 


For from the Sun entering into Aries and Libra the Equinoctial or the Spring and 
Autumne arise; from the Sun his entrance into Cancer and Capricorn ariseth the 
Solstice of Summer and Winter. 


[FIXED SIGNS.] The Fixed Signs doe in order follow the Equinoctial and Tropicks; 
and they are called fixed, for that when Sun enters into them, the season of the yeer 
is fixed, and we doe more evidently perceive either Heat or Cold, Moysture or 
Drinesse. The fixed Signes are these, Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, Aquarius. 


[COMMON.] Signes are constitutes between moveable and fixed, and retain a 
property or nature, pertaking both with the preceding and consequent Sign: and they 
are Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, Pisces. 


They are called Bycorporeall or double bodied, because they represent two Bodies: 
as Gemini two Twinnes, Pisces two Fishes. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


89 


The right knowledge of these in Astrology is much, and you must understand it thus; 
In the Question or Figure of Heaven, if the Planet who is Lord of the Ascendant be in 
a moveable Sign, and the Sign ascending be also one, it denotes the person to be 
unstable, and of no resolution, easily mutable, perverted, a wavering unconstant 
man. 


Let us admit the Ascendant to be fixed, and the Lord of that Sign also in a fixed Sign, 
you may judge the party to be of firm resolution, no changling; or as we say, one that 
will stand to maintaine what he hath said or done, be it good or ill. 


If the Sign ascending be common, and the Lord of that Sign also in a Common Sign, 
you may judge the man or woman to be neither very wilful or easily variable but 
between both. 


The Signs also are divided into 

Bestail or Quadrupediall, in viz. Aries, Taurus, Leo, Sagittarius, Capricorn; these 
have representation of Four-footed Creatures. 

Fruitful or prolifical, viz. Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces. 

Barren Signs, Gemini, Leo, Virgo. 

Manly or humane, curteous Signs, Gemini, Virgo, Libra, Aquarius. 

Ferall Signs are Leo and last part of Sagittarius. 

Mute Signs or of slow Voice, Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces; the more if Mercury be in any 
of them, in Conjunction, Square, or Opposition of Saturn. 


The use hereof is, that if your Significator or Lord of the Ascendant be in Aries, 
Taurus, Leo, Sagittarius, Capricorn, there’s in the condition of that party something of 
the nature of that Beast which represents that Sign he is in; as if he be in Aries, the 
man is rash, hardy and lascivious; if in Taurus, steadfast and resolved, and 
laurie, of a muddy condition, vitiated, with some private imperfection, &c. and so 
of the rest. 


Let us admit, one propounds his Question, if he shall have children, then if the Moon 
and principall Significator be in Prolificall Signs, and strong, there’s no question but 
he shall the same doe, if the Question concern Barrennesse, viz, if the Ascendant or 
eee be of those Signs we call barren Signs, it generally represents few or no 
children. 


In Questions, if Gemini, Virgo, Libra or Aquarius ascend, or the Lord of the 
Ascendant 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


90 


be in humane Signs, then we may judge the man to be of civill carriage, very affable 
and easie to be spoken withall, &c. 


[ANTISCION OF THE PLANETS.] Besides these and many other divisions of the 
Signs, | thought good to be plain in setting down the Antiscions of the Planets. 


[PTOL. APHO. STELLAE IRRATIO.] The Antiscion Signs are those, which are of the 
same vertue and are equally distant from the first degree of the two Tropick Signs, 
Cancer, Capricorn, and in which degrees whilest the Sun is, the dayes and nights are 
of equall length; by example it will be plain; when the Sun is in the tenth degree of 
Taurus, he is as far distant from the first degree of Cancer as when in the twentieth 
degree of Leo; therefore when the Sun is in the tenth of Taurus, he hath his Antiscion 
to the twentieth of Leo; that is, he giveth vertue or influence to any Star or Planet that 
at that time either is in the same degree by Conjunction, or casteth any Aspect unto 
it. 


But that you may more fully and perfectly know where your Antiscion fals in degrees 
and minutes, behold this following Table. 


A generall Table of Antiscions in Signs. 


GEMINI CANCER 
LEO TAURUS 
VIRGO ARIES 
LIBRA PISCES 
SCORPIO AQUARIUS 
SAGITTARIUS CAPRICORN 


Any Planet in Gemini sends his Antiscion into Cancer, or being in Leo into Taurus. 
If you would know the exact degrees and minutes, you must work as followeth. 


Let us suppose Saturn in twenty degrees and thirty five minutes of Leo, | would know 
in what part of the Zodiack he hath his Antiscion. 


Over against Leo | find Taurus, so then | conclude his Antiscion is in Taurus. To know 


the degree and minutes, work thus: 
See what degree and minute the Planet is in, subtract that 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


91 


from 30 degrees, and the remainder tels you both the degree and minute. 


As Saturn being in 20 degrees and 35 minutes of Leo, | subtracted 
from 30 
20.35 


9 25 Subtracted. 


Here | subtract 25 min. from one whole degr. or from 60 min. which | borrow, and 
there rests 25 min. one degr. | borrowed, taken from 10, and there rest 9 degr. one 
that | borrowed and two are three, taken from three, then nothing remains, so then | 
find my Antiscion of Saturn fals to be in 9 degr. & 25 min. of Taurus, which Signs as 
you see is over against Leo; but this Table expresseth the work more quickly. 


The Antiscions | Antiscions of the Planets in minutes. 
in degr. 

1 29 1 59 16 44 
2 28 2 58 17 43 
3 2f 3 57 18 42 
4 26 4 56 19 A1 
5 25 5 55 20 40 
6 24 6 54 21 39 
7 |in|23 7 5S 22 38 
8 22 8 | in| 52 23 | in | 37 
9 21 9 51 24 36 
10 20 10 50 25 a5 
11 19 11 49 26 34 
12 18 12 48 27 33 
13 17 13 47 28 32 
14 16 14 46 29 31 
15 15 15 45 30 30 


The use is easie if you enter with the whole degrees of your Planet, the two first 
columns serve you, as Mars, supposed to be 14 degr. of a Sign, look for 14 in the 
first column, over against it is 16, to that degree he sends his Antiscian. 


If you have minutes, enter the four last columns; as if you enter with 17 mm., in the 
first column, over against it you find 43. or first look the Sign where the Antiscion fals, 
then suctract the number of degr. and minutes the Planet is in, from 30, what 
remaines is the degree and minute where the Antiscion is; and as there are 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


a2 


Antiscions, which of the good Planets we think are equall to a Sextile or Trine; so are 
there Contrantiscions, which we find to be of the nature of a Square or Opposition: 
and to know where it is, you doe more then observe in what Sign and degree the 
Antiscion is, in the Sign and degree opposite to that place the Contrantiscion: as in 
the former examples, the Antiscion of Saturn is in nine degr. and 25 min. of Taurus, 
his Contrantiscion must then be in 9 degr. and 25 min. of Scorpio. 


There are also many other divisions of the Signs: as into Signs commanding, viz. 
ARIES TAURUS GEMINI CANCER LEO VIRGO 


And Signs obeying LIBRA SCORPIO SAGITTARIUS CAPRICORN AQUARIUS 
PISCES. 


An into Signs of right or long ascention, viz) CANCER LEO VIRGO LIBRA 
AQUARIUS SAGITTARIUS. 


An into Signs of shorter oblique ascention, viz. CAPRICORN AQUAIRIUS PISCES 
ARIES TAURUS GEMINI. 


The Signs of long ascention continue two hours and more in the Ascendant: and 
Signs of short ascentions, doe arise in little more then an houre, and some in lesse, 
as you may experiment by the table of Houses: 


| would know how many houres Signe of Leo continues in Ascendant or Horizon? 


In the first column of the Table of Houses, | look for the Sign Leo, under the title of 
the first House, and in the fourth line, | finde S Leo 21, viz, no degree, 21 min. of Leo. 


Over against that number on the left hand, under the title of houses and min. or time 
from noon, | finde 00. 18 min. or no houres, 18 min. | then continue with my sign Leo 
in the same column until | find 29.40. by which | perceive that the sign Leo is 
removed out of the Ascendant; | seek under the title of houres and minutes from 
noon over against the said 29. 40 of Leo: on the lett hand, what houres and min. 
stand there. | find the number of 3.ho. 6.min. | subtract my former number of 00. 18 
min. from 3 hours and 6 min. 


3.h. 6.m. 
00 18 
2 48. there remaines two houres and 48 min. of an houre, which is all the 


space of time that Leo continues in the Ascendant, and in this regard it is called a 
sign of long ascentions. 


You shall see the difference now in a signe of short Ascention. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


93 


| would know how long the signe of Aquarius continues in the Ascendant. See in the 
ninth column, and under the title of the first house: in the third line | finde 00 aquarius 
57, viz. 0 degree, 57 min. of aquarius, over against it under houres and min. | find 16, 
4 min. in the tenth line under the first house | find 29.28. against it on the left hand 
17.8 viz. Pr poules, 8 min. | subtract my former houres and min. from the latter 


16 ~— 4 


1 4. 


the difference is one houre and 4 min. and so long time the sign of Aquarius rests in 
the Ascendant: without exact knowledge hereof, one cannot attain to any exactnesse 
in naturall Magick, viz. in gathering Hearbs, or perfecting many other rarities. 


That which is most necessary for every Student in the Art is, that he know and be 
expert in the following Chapter. 


CHAP. XVI. 


The Nature, Place, Countries, generall Description, and Diseases signified 
by the twelve signes. 


[QUALITY.] Aries is a Masculine, Diurnall Sign, moveable, Cardinall, Equinoctiall; in 
nature fiery, hot and dry, cholerick, bestial, luxurious, intemperate and violent: the 
diurnall house of Mars of the Fiery Triplicity, and of the East. 


[DISEASES.] All Pushes, Whelks, Pimples in the Face, small Pocks, hare Lips, 
Polypus, (noli me tangere) Ringwormes, Falling-sicknesse, Apoplexies, Megrims, 
Tooth-ach, Head-ach and Baldnesse. 


[PLACES ARIES SIGNIFIETH.] Where Sheep and small Cattle doe feed or use to be, 
sandy and hilly Grounds, a place of refuge for Theeves, (as some unfrequented 
place;) in Houses, the Covering, Seeling or Plaisting of it, a Stable of small Beasts, 
Lands newly taken in, or newly plowed, or where Bricks have been burned or Lyme. 


[DESCRIPTION OF THE BODY SHAPE ARIES PRESENTS.] A dry Body, not 
exceeding in height, lean or spare, but lusty Bones, and the party in his Limmes 
strong; the 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


94 


Visage long; black Eye-browes, a long Neck, thick Shoulders, the Complexion dusky 
brown or swartish. 


[KINGDOMS SUBJECT TO ARIES.] Germany, Swevia, Polonia, Burgundy, France, 
England, Denmark, Silesia the higher, Judea, Syria. 


[CITIES.] Florence, Capua, Napels, Ferrara, Verona, Utrecht, Marselles, 
Augustia, Casarea, Padna, Bergamo. 


[QUALITIES OF THE SIGNE TAURUS.] Taurus is an Earthly, Cold, Dry, Melancholy, 
Feminine, Nocturnal, Fixed, Domestical or Beastial Sign, of the Earthly Triplicity, and 
South, the Night-house of Venus. 


oe! The Kings Evil, sore Throats, Wens, Fluxes of Rheumes falling into the 
hroat, Quinzies, It apostumes in those part. 


[PLACES.] Stables where Horses are, low Houses, Houses where the implements of 
Cattle are laid up, Patures or Feeding grounds where no Houses are fleer, plain 
grounds, or where Bushes have bin latley grub’d up, and Wherein Wheat and Corn is 
sowed, some little Tree not far off, in Houses, Sellars, low Rooms. 


[SHAPE AND DESCRIPTION.] It presents one of a short, but of a full, strong and wel 
set stature, a broad Forehead, great Eyes, big Face; large, strong Shoulders; great 
mouth, and thick Lips; grosse Hands; black rugged Hair. 


[KINGDOMS SUBJECT TO TAURUS.] Polonia the great, North part of Sweathland, 
Russia, Ireland, Switzerland, Lorrain, Campania, Persia, Cypress, Parthia. 


[CITIES.] Novmgrade, Parma, Bolonia, Panormus, Mantita, Sena, Brixia, Carolstad, 
Nants, Liepsig, Herbipolis. 


[QUALITY AND PROPERTY OF GEMINI] Gemini, it's an aerial, hot, moyst, 
sanguine, Diurnal, common or dounle-bodied human Sign; the diurnall house of 
Mercury of the aery triplicity, Western, Mascutine. 


[DISEASES.] He signifies all Diseases or infirmities in the Armes, Shoulders, Hands, 
corrupted Blood, Windinesse in the Veines, distempered Fancies. 


[PLACES.] Wainscot Roomes, Plaistering, and Wals of Houses, the Halls, or where 
Play is used, Hils and Mountaines, Barnes, Storehouses for Corn, Coffers, Chests, 
High Places. 


eae ei Lumbardy, Brabant, Flanders, the West and Southwest of England, 
rmienia. 


[CITIES.] London, Lovaine, Bruges, Norrimberg, Corduba, Hasford, Mentz, Bamberg, 
Cesena. 


[DESCRIPTION.] An upright, tall, straight Body either in Man or Woman, 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


95 


the Complexion sanguine, not cleer, but obscure and dark, long Arms, but many 
times the Hands and Feet short and very fleshy; a dark Hair, almost Black; a strong, 
active Body, a good piercing hazel Eye, and wanton, and of perfect sight, of excellent 
understanding, and judicious in worldly affairs. 


[QUALITY AND PROPERTY OF CANCER.] Cancer is the onely house of the Moon, 
and is the first Sign of the Watry or Northern Triplicity, is Watry, Cold, Moyst, 
Flegmatick, Feminine, Nocturnal, Moveable, a Solstice Sign mute and slow of Voyce, 
Fruitful, Northern. 


[DISEASES.] It signifies Imperfections all over, or in the Brest, Stomack and Paps, 
weak Digestion, cold Stomack, Ptisick, salt Flegms, roten Coughs, dropsicall 
Humours, Impostumations in the Stomack, Cancers which ever are in the Brest. 


[PLACES.] The Sea, great Rivers, Navigable Waters; but in the Inland Countries it 
notes places neer Rivers, Brooks, Springs, Wels, Sellars in Houses, Wash-houses, 
Marsh grounds, Ditches with Rushes, Sedges, Sea banks, Trenches, Cisternes. 


[SHAPE AND DESCRIPTION.] Generally a low and small stature, the upper parts of 
more bigness then the lower, a round Visage; sickly pale, a whitely Complexion, the 
Hair a sad brown, little Eyes, prone to have many Children, if a Woman. 


[KINGDOMS, COUNTRIES & CITIES.] Scotland, Zealand, Holland, Prusia, Tunis, 
Algier, Constantinople, Venice, Millan, Genoa, Amsterdam, Yorke, Magdeberg, 
Wittenberg, Saint Lucas, Cadiz. 


[QUALITY AND PROPERTY OF LEO.] Leo is the onely house of the Sun, by nature, 
Fiery, Hot, Dry, Cholerick, Diurnal, Commanding, Bestial, Barren, of the East and 
Fiery Triplicity, Masculine. 


[DISEASES.] All sicknesses in the ribs abd sides, as Plurises, Convulsons, paines in 
the back, trembling or passion of the heart, violent burning-feavers, all weaknesse or 
diseases in the heart, sore eyes, the Plague, the Pestilence, the yellow-Jaundices. 


[PLACES.] A place where wilde Beasts frequent, Woods, Forests, Desert places, 
steep rocky places, unaccessable places, Kings Palaces, Castles, Forts, Parks, in 
houses where fire is kept, neer a Chimney. 


[SHAPE AND FORM.] Great round Head, big Eyes starting or staring out, or goggle- 
eyes, quick-sighted, a full and large body and is more then of middle stature, broad 
Shoulders, narrow Sides, yellow or dark flaxen hair and it much curling or turning up, 
a fierce 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


96 


countenance, but ruddy, high sanguine complexion, strong valiant and active. 


[KINGDOMS, COUNTRIES, CITIES.] Italy, Bohemia, the Alpes, Turkie, Sicilia, 
Apulia, Rome, Syracusa, Cremona, Ravenna, Damasco, Prague, Lintz, Constuentia, 
Bristol. 


[QUALITY AND PROPERTY OF VIRGO.] Virgo it’s an earthly, cold, melancholly, 
barren, feminine, nocturnail, Southern Sign; the house and exaltation of Mercury, of 
the earthly triplicity. 


[PLACES.] It signifies a Study where Books are, a slocet, a Dairy-house, Corne- 
fields, Granaries, Malt-houses, Hay-ricks, or of Barley, Wheat or Pease, or a place 
where Cheese and Butter is preserved and stored up. 


[DISEASES.] The Wormes, Winde, Choslicke, all Obstructions in the bowels and 
miseraicks, croking of the Guts, infirmenesse in the Stones, and disease in the belly. 


[KINGDOMS, COUNTRIES, CITIES.] Greece, the south part thereof, Croatia, the 
Athenian territory, Mesepotamia, Affrica, the southwest of France, Paris, Hierasalem, 
Rhodes, Lyons, Thoulous, Rafil, Heidelburge, Brundusiam. 


[SHAPE AND FORM.] A slender body of mean height, but decently composed; a 
ruddy brown complexion, black hair, well-favoured or lovely, but no beautiful creature, 
a small shrill voyce, all members inclining to brevity; a witty discreet soul, judicious 
and excellently well spoken, studious and given to History, whether Man or Woman, it 
produceth a care, understanding, if Mercury be in this Sign, and Moon in Cancer, but 
somewhat unstable. 


[NATURE AND PROPERTY OF LIBRA.] Libra is a Signe aeriall, hot and moyst, 
Sanguine, Masculine, Moveable, Equinoctiall, Cardinall, Humane, Diumnall, of the 
Aerinall Triplicity, and Western, the chief House of Venus. 


[DISEASES.] All Diseases, or the Stone or Gravell in the reines of the Backe, 
Kidnies, heats and diseases in the Loynes or Hanches, Impostumes or Ulcers in the 
Reines, Kidnies or Bladder, weaknesse in the Backe, corruption of Blood. 


[PLACES.] In the Fields it represents ground neer Winde-mils, or some stragling 
Barne or out-house, or Saw-pits, or where Coopers work or Wood is cut, sides of hils, 
tops of Mountains, grounds where Hawking and Hunting is used, sandy and gravelly 
Fiel is, pure dleer Ayre and sharp, the upper rooms in Houses, Chambers, Garrets, 
one Chamber within another. 


[SHAPE AND FORM.] It personates a well framed body straight, tall and more 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


97 


subtill or slender then grosse; a round, lovely and beautifull Visage, a pure sanguine 
colour; in Youth, no abundance or excesse in either white or red, but in Age usually 
some pimples, or a very high Colour, the Hair yellowish, smooth and long. 


[KINGDOMS, COUNTRIES, CITIES.] The higher Austria, Savoy its Dukedom, 
Alsatia, Livonia, Lisbone in Portugal, Frankeford, Vienna, Placentia the territory, in 
Greece where sometimes the City Thebes stood, Aries, Friburge, Spires. 


[QUALITY AND PROPERTY OF SCORPIO.] Scorpio is a cold, watry, nocturnal, 
flegmatick, feminine signe, of the watry Triplicity, fixed and North, the house and joy 
of Mars, feminine; usually it doth represent subtill, deceitfull men. 


Toe arta baecre the Stone in the Secret parts, Bladder, Ruptures, Fistulaes, or 
the Pyles in Ano, Gonorrhea’s, Priapisaics, all aflicting the Privy parts either in Man or 
Woman; defects in the Matrix. 


[PLACES.] Places where all sorts of creeping Beasts use, as Beetles, &c. or such as 
be without wings, and are poysonous; Gardens, Orchards, Vineyards, Ruinous 
Houses neer Waters; muddy, moorish Grounds, stinking Lakes, Quagmires, Sinks, 
the Kitchen or Larder, Wash-house. 


[FORM AND DESCRIPTION.] A corpulent, strong, able Body, somewhat a broad or 
square Face, a dusky muddy complexion, and sad, dark Hair, much and crisping; an 
hairy Body, somewhat bowlegged, short necked, a squat, wel-trussed Fellow. 


[KINGDOMS, COUNTRIES, CITIES.] North part of Bavaria, the Woddy part of 
Norway, Barbary, the Kingdom of Fez, Catalonia in Spain, Valentia, Urbine and 
Forum Julit in Italy, Vienna, Messina in Italy, Gaum, Frankenford upon Odor. 


[QUALITY AND NATURE OF SAGITTARIUS.] Sagittarius is of the fiery triplicity, 
East, in nature fiery, hot, dry, Masculine, Cholericke, Diurnall, Common, bycorporall 
or double bodied, the House and Joy of Jupiter. 


[DISEASES.] It ruleth the Thighes and Buttocks in the parts of mans body, and all 
Fistulaes or Hurts falling in those members, and generally denoteth blood heated, 
Feavers Pestilentiall, fals from Horses, or hurts from them or four-footed Beasts; also 
prejudice by Fire, Heat and intemperatenesse in Sports. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


98 


[PLACES.] A Stable of great Horses, or Horses for the Wars, or a House where 
usually great four-footed Beasts are kept; it represents in the Fields, Hils, and the 
highest places of Lands or Grounds that rise a little above the rest; in houses upper 
rooms, neer the fire. 


[SHAPE AND FORM OF BODY.] It represents a wel-favoured Countenance, 
somewhat long Visage, but full and ruddy, or almost like Sun-burnt; the Hair light 
Chestnut colour, the stature somewhat above the middle Size; a conformity in the 
Members, and strong able body. 


[KINGDOMS, COUNTRIES, CITIES.] Spain, Hungary, Slavonia, Moravia, Dalmatia, 
Buda, in Hungary, Toledo, Narbon, Cullen, Stargard. 


[QUALITY AND NATURE OF CAPRICORN.] Capricorn is the House of Saturn, and 
is Nocturnal, Cold, Dry, Melancholly, Earthly, Feminine, Soisticall, Cardinall, 
Moveable, Domesticall, Four-footed, Southern; the exaltation of Mars. 


[DISEASES.] It hath government of the Knees, and all Diseases incident to those 
places, either by Straines or Fractures; it notes Leprosie, the Itch, the Scab. 


[PLACES.] It shews an Oxe-house, or Cow-house, or where Calves are kept, or 
Tooles for Husbandry, or old Wood is laid up; or where Sailes for Ships and such 
Materials are stored; also Sheep-Pens, and grounds where Sheep-feed, Fallow- 
grounds, barren-Fields Bushy and Thorny; Dunghils in Fields, or where Soyle is laid; 
in houses low, dark places, neer the ground or threshold. 


[CORPORATURE.] Usually dry Bodies, not high of Stature, long, lean and slender 
Visage, thin Beard, black Hair, a narrow Chin, long small Neck and narrow Brest, | 
have found many times Capricorn ascending, the party to have white hair, but in the 
seventh ever Black, | conceive the whitenesse proceeded from the nature of the 
Family rather then of the Signe. 


[KINGDOMS, COUNTRIES, CITIES.] Thrace, Macedon in Greece now Turkie, 


Albania, Bulgaria, Saxony the South-west part, West-Indias, Stiria, the Isles Orcades, 
Hassia, Oxford, Mecklin, Cleves, Brandenburge. 


[NATURE AND PROPERTY OF AQUARIUS.] Aquarius is an aierial, hot and moyst 
Sign, of the aiery Triplicity, diurnal, Sanguine, fixed, rational, humane, masculine, the 
principall house of Saturn, and house wherein he most rejoyceth; Westerne. 


[SICKNESSE.] Aquarius governeth the Legs, Andes, and all manner of 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


99 


infirmities incident to those members, all melancholy Winds coagulated in the Veines, 
or disturbing the Blood, Cramps, &c. 


[PLACES.] Hilly and uneven places, places new digged, or where quarries of Stone 
are, or any Minerals have been digged up; in Houses, the roofs, eaves or upper 
parts; Vineyards, or neer some little Spring or Conduit-head. 


[SHAPE AND FORM.] It presents a squat, thick Corporature, or one of a strong, well 
composed Body, not tall; a long Visage, sanguine Complexion; if Saturn who is Lord 
of this house, be in Capricorn or Aquarius, the party is black in Hair, and in 
Complexion sanguine, with distorted Teeth; otherwayes, | have observed the party is 
of deer, white or fair Complexion, and of sandy coloured Hair, or very flaxen, and a 
very pure Skin. 


[KINGDOMS, COUNTRIES, CITIES.] Tartary, Croatia, Valachia, Muscovia, 
Westphalia in Germany, Piemont in Savoy, the West and South parts of Bavaria, 
Media, Arabia, Hamborough, Breme, Montsferat and Pisaurum in Italy, Trent, 
Ingolstad. 


[PROPERTY AND QUALITIES PISCES.] Pisces is of the Watry Triplicity, Northern, 
cold Sign, moyst, Flegmatick, feminine, nocturnal, the house of Jupiter, and 
exaltation of Venus, a Bycorporeal, common or double-bodied Sign, an idle, 
effeminate, sickly Signe, or representing a party of no action. 


[SICKENESSE.] All diseases in the Feet, as the Gout, and all Lamenesse and Aches 
incident to those members, and so generally salt Flegms, Scabs, Itch, Borches, 
Breakings out, Boyles and Ulcers proceeding from Blood putrificated, Colds and 
moyst diseases. 


[PLACES.] It represents Grounds full of water, or where many Springs and much 
Fowl, also fish-ponds or Rivers full of Fish, places where Hermitages have been, 
Moats about Houses, WaterMils; in houses neer the water, as to some Well or Pump, 
or where water stands. 


[CORPORATURE.] A short stature, ill composed, not, not very decent, a good large 
Face, palish Complexion, the Body fleshy or swelling, not very straight, but 
incurvating somewhat with the Head. 


[KINGDOM, COUNTRIES, CITIES.] Calabria in Sicilia, Portugall, Normandy, the 
North of Egypt, Alexandria, Rnemes, Wormes, Ratisbone, Compostella. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


100 


CHAP. XVII. 


Teaching what use may be made of the former Discourse 
of the twelve Signs. 


f one demand of the Artist, of what condition, quality or stature the person quesited, 

or enquired of is, then observe the Signe of that house whereby he is signified, the 
sign wherein the Lord of that house is, and wherein the Moon is, mix one with 
another, and by the greater testimonies judge; for if the Signe be humane, aerial, that 
ascends or descends, and the Lord of that Signe or the Moon in any Signe of the 
same triplicity or nature, you may judge the Body to be handsome, and the conditions 
of the party to be sociable, or he very courteous, &c. 


If the Quere be concerning a Disease, and Aries be either on the cusp of the 
Ascendant, or descending in the sixt, you may judge he hath something in his 
Disease of the nature of Aries, but what it is, you must know by the concurrence of 
the other significators. 


lf a Country man or Citizen hath lost or misseth and Cattle, or any materiall thing in 
his house, let him observe in what Signe the Significator of the thing is in; if in Aries, 
and it be a Beast strayed, or the like, let him see what manner of places that Signe 
directs unto, and let him repair thither to search, considering the quarter of the 
heaven the Signe signifies: if it be an unmoveable piece of Goods, that without man 
or woman cannot be removed, then let him look into such parts of his house, or about 
his house as Aries signifies. 


If one aske concerning Travell, whether such a Country, City or Kingdom will be 
healthfull or prosperous unto him, yea or no; see in the Figure in what Signe the Lord 
of the Ascendant is in, if the significator be fortunate in Aries, or if Jupiter or Venus be 
therein, he may safely travell or sojourn in such Cities or Countries as the Signe of 
Aries represents, which you may easily discern in the abovenamed Catalogue: Those 
countries subject to the Signe wherein the Infortunes are posited, unlesse 
themselves 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


101 


be significators, are even unfortunate: where remember, that a Gentleman enquires 
usually, if he shall have his health and live jocundly in such or such a Country or City; 
the merchant by wholly aimes at Trade, and the encrease of his Stock, therefore in 
the Merchants Figure you must consider the Country or City subject to the Sign of the 
second house, or where the Part of Fortune is, or Lord of the second is, and which is 
most fortified, and thither let him Trade. 


CHAP. XVIII. 


Of the Essentiall Dignities of the Planets. 


Tie exact way of judicature in Astrology is, first, by being perfect in the nature of 
the Planets and Signes. 


Secondly, by knowing the strength, fortitude or debility of the Planets, Significators, 
and a well poysing of them and their aspects and severall mixtures, in your judgment. 


Thirdly, by rightly applying the influence of the positure of Heaven erected, and the 
Planets aspects to one another at the time of the Question, according to naturall (and 
not enforced) maximes of Art; for by how much you endeavour to strain a judgment 
beyond nature, by so much the more you augment your Errour. 


A Planet is then said to be really strong when he hath many Essential dignities, which 
are known, by his being either in his House, Exaltation, Triplicity, Terme or Face, at 
time of the erecting the Figure. As Example: 


[ESSENTIAL DIGNITY, HOUSE.] In an scheam of Heaven, if you find a Planet in any 
of those Signes we call his house or houses, he is then essentially strong, and we 
allow for that five dignities; as Saturn in Capricorn, Jupiter in Sagittarius, &c. 


In Judgment, when a Planet or Significator is in his own house, it represents a man in 
such a condition, as that he is Lord of his own house, estate and fortune; or a man 
wanting very little of the Goods of this world, or it tels you the man is in a very happy 
state or condition: this will be true, unlesse the 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


102 


significator be retrograde, or combust, or afflicted by any other malevolent Planet or 
aspect. 


[EXALTATION.] If he be in that Signe wherein he is exalted, you may allow him four 
dignities essentiall, whether he be neer the very degree of his exaltation, yea or not; 
as Mars in Capricorn or Jupiter in Cancer. 


If the Significator be in his exaltation, and no wayes impedited, but Angular; it 
presents a person of pea) condition arrogant, aaffirming more unto him then his 
due; for it’s observed, the Planets in some part of the Zodiack doe more evidently 
declare their effects then in others; and | conceive this to be in those Signes and 
degrees where fixed Starres of the same nature with the Planet, are more in number, 
and neerer the Ecliptick. 


[TRIPLICITY.] If he be in any of those Signes which are alotted him for Triplicity, he 
hath allowed him three dignities; but herein you must be cautious; as for example: In 
a Question, Nativity, or the like, if you find the Sun in Aries, and the Question, or 
Nativity, or Scheam erected be by night, and you would examine the Sun his 
fortitudes, he shall have four dignities for being in his exaltation, which continues 
through the Signe; but shall not be allowed any dignity, as being in his triplicity; for by 
night the Sun ruleth not the fiery Triplicity, but Jupiter; who had he been in place of 
the Sun, and by night, must have had allowed him three dignities: and this doe 
generally in all the Planets, Mars excepted, who night and day ruleth the watry 
Triplicity. 


A Planets in his triplicity, shews a man modestly indued with the Goods and Fortune 
of this world, one prettily descended, and the condition of his life at present time of 
the Question, to be good; but not so, as if in either of the two former dignities. 


[TERMS.] If any Planet be in those degrees we assign for his Terms, we allow him 
two dignities; as whether day or night, if Jupiter be in one, two, three or four, &c. 
degrees of Aries, he is then in his oen Terms, and must have two dignities therefore, 
and so Venus in any of the first eight degrees of Taurus, &c. 


A Planet fortified, onely as being in his own Terms, rather shews a man more of the 
corporature and temper of the Planet, 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


103 


then any extraordinary abundance in fortune, or of eminency in the Common- 
wealth. 


[FACE.] If any Planet be in his Decanate, Decurie or Face, as Mars in the first 
ten eee of Aries, or in Mercury in the first ten degrees of Taurus, he is 
then allowed one essentiall dignity; for being in his own Decanate or Face, 
cannot then be called peregrine. 


A Planet having little or no dignity, but by being in his Decanate or Face, is 
almost like a man ready to be turned out of doors, having much adoe to 
maintaine himself in credit and reputation: and in Genealogies it represents a 
Family at the last gasp, even as good as quite decayed, barely able to support 
it self. 


The Planets may be strong another manner of way, viz. Accidentally; as when 
Direct, swift in Motion, Angular, in Trine or Sextile aspect with Jupiter or 
Venus, &c. or in Conjuction with certain notable fixed Stars, as shall hereafter 
be related; Here followeth a Table of Essentiall Dignities, by which onely 
casting your eye thereon, you may perceive that essential dignity or imbeciltiy 
any Planet hath. 


There hath been much difference between Arabians, Greeks and Indians 
concerning the Essential Dignities of the Planets; | mean how to dispose the 
severall degrees of the Sign fitly to every Planet; after many Ages had passed, 
and until the time of Ptolorney, the Astrologians were not wel resolved hereof; 
but since Potolemy his time, the Grecians unanimously followed the method 
he left, and which ever since the other Christians of Europe to this day retain 
as most rationall; but the Moores of Barbary at present and those Astrologians 
of their Nation who lived in Spain doe so somewhat at this day vary from us; 
however | present thee with a Table according to Ptolomey. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


104 


A Table of the Essentiall Dignities of the Planets 
According to Plolomy 


Sign | House | Exal Triplicity The Termes of the Planets The faces of the Det | Fall 
Dn | Noc Planets : 

v 7 D|O19} © 4 46 | 914] ¥ 21) 726) 430] 710] © 20] ° 30] °¢ b 

fe) @ N|D 3] 9 D) 98 | 315) 422) 420) 730) 310} >» 20} 430] & 

pig > DI 3] % 9 97 )%4 14) 9 21) 625) 730} 410) 720} 030} + 

& >» ND | 415] 2& a “6 | 413} ¥ 20) 9 27/ > 30} 910) ¥ 20} » 30] > of 

N © ND © 4 56) 3913) 919] ¥25|) 730} 510] ¥20| 730] + 

4 5 N/| 15] 9 D) 97 |)913) 418) 424) 730} 010) ¢ 20} 30] 9 

2 ¢? D}] 21] % 3 56/911) 419] 3 24) 730/) 10) 520) ¥30]} #7 | © 

™, ao N of of 76 | 414] 9 21] ¥ 27 | 430] 710] O20] ° 30] °¢ ») 

x ¥ D|¥v 3} oO 4 48 | 914) 919) 625] 730} 310] Dd 20} 4 30] FY 

zo) 6 N | %28] 9 D) 96) 3912) 419} 725} 430) ¥10} 720} 030} Dd 4 

an ’ D ) 3 56 | 912) 920) * 25) #730] 910} ¥ 20] » 30; © 

x* 4% N | 927) & oi 98 | 414) 320) 726) 430) 410) 420] 730] 8 3 


The Use of the Table. 


Every Planet hath two signs for his House, except Sol and Luna, they but one apiece: 
Saturn hath Capricorn and Aquarius; Jupiter Sagittarius and Pisces; Mars - Aries, 
Scorpio; Sun - Leo; Venus -Taurus, Libra; Mercury - Gemini, Virgo; Moon - Cancer. 
The one of these Houses is called Diurnall, noted in the second Column by the Letter 
D. The other is Nocturnall, noted by the Letter N. In these Signs the Planets have 
their Exaltations, which the third Column points out; as the Sun in 19 Aries; Moon in 3 
Taurus, North Node in 3 degr. Gemini, &c. are exalted. 


These twelve Signes are divided into Four Triplicities: The fourth Column tels you 
which Planet or Planets both night and day govern each Triplicity: As over against 
Aries, Leo, Sagittarius, you find Sun, Jupiter, viz) Sun governeth by day in that 
triplicity, and Jupiter by night: Over against Taurus, Virgo, Capricorn, you find Venus 
and Moon; viz, that Venus hath domination by day, and Moon by night in that 
Triplicity: Over against Gemini, Libra, Aquarius, you find Saturn, Mercury; which rule 
as aforesaid: 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


105 


Over against Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces, you find Mars, who, according to Ptolomey 
and Naibod, ruleth onely that Triplicity both day and night. 


Over agianst Aries, in the fifth, sixth, seventh, eighth, ninth column, you find Jupiter 6. 
Venus 14, which tels you, the first six degrees of Aries are the Terms of Jupiter; from 
six to fourteen, the terms of Venus, &c. 


Over against Aries, in the tenth, rlrvrnth and twelfth columns, you find Mars 10. Sun 
20. Venus 30. viz, the first 10 degrees of Aries are the Face of Mars; from ten to 
twenty the Face of Sun; from twenty to thirty the Face of Venus, &c. 


In the thirteenth column, over against Aries, you find Venus Detrirnent;viz. Venus 
being in Aries, is in a Sign opposite to one of her own Houses, and so is said to be in 
her Detriment. 


In the fourteenth column, over against Aries, you find Saturn, over his head Fall; that 
is, Saturn when he is in Aries is opposite to Libra his Exaltation, and so is Infortunate, 
&c. Though these things are expressed in the nature of the Planets already, yet this 
Table makes it appear more evidently to the eye. 


CHAP. XIX. 


Of Several Terms, Aspects, words of Art, Accidents, 
and other materiall things happening amongst he Planets; 
with other necessary Rules to be well known and understood 
before any Judgment can be given upon a Question. 


Te most forcible or strongest Rayes, Configurations or Aspects, are onely these 
(nominated before) the Sextil, Quadrate, Trine, Opposition, we use to call the 
Conjunction, an Aspect, but very improperly. 


A Sextile aspect is the distance of one Planet from another by the sixt part of the 
Zodiack or Circle; for six times sixty degr. doe make 360. degr. this aspect you shall 
find called sometimes a Sexangular aspect, or an Hexagon. 


A Quadrate aspect, or Quadranglar, or Tetragonall, is the distance of two Points, or 


two Planets by a fourth part of the Circle, for four times ninety doe contain three 
hundred and sixty degrees. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


106 


The Trine aspect consists of 120 degrees, or by a third part of the Circle, for three 
times an humdred and twenty degrees make the whole Circle, or 360 degrees: It’s 
called a Triangular aspect, or Trigonall, and if you find sometimes the word 
Trigonocraton, it is as much as a Planet ruling or having domination in such a 
Triplicity or Trygon; for three Signs make one Trygon or Triplicity. 


An Opposition or Diametrall Radiation is, when two Planets are equally distant 180 
degrees, or half the Circle from each other. 


A Conjunction, Coition, Synod or Congresse (for some use all these words) is, when 
two Planets are in one and the same degree and minute of a Sign: Other new 
Aspects | have formerly mentioned in the beginning of this Discourse. You must 
understand amongst these Aspects, the Quadrate Aspect is a sign of imperfect 
emnity; and that the oe is an aspect or argument of perfect hatred; which is 
to be understood thus: A Question is propounded, Whether two persons at variance 
may be reconciled? Admit | find the two Significators representing the two 
Adversaries, in Square aspect; | may then judge because the aspect is of imperfect 
hatred, that the matter is not yet so far gone, but there may be hopes of reconciliation 
betwixt them, the other Significators or Planets a little helping. But if | find the main 
significators in opposition, it’s then in nature impossible to expect a peace betwixt 
them till the suit is ended, if it be a suit of Law; untill they have fought, if it be a 
Challenge. 


The Sextile and Trine aspects are arguments of Love, Unity and Friendship; but the 
Trine is more forcible, (viz.) if the two Significators are in Sextile or Trine, no doubt 
but peace may be easily concluded. 


Conjunctions are good or bad, as the Planets in Conjunction are friends or enemies 
to one another. 


There is also a Partill or Platick aspect: Partill aspect is when two Planets are exactly 
so many degrees from each other as make a perfect aspect: as if Mercury be in nine 
degrees of Aries, and Jupiter in nine degrees of Leo, this is a Partill Trine aspect: So 
Sun in one degree of Taurus, and Moon in one degree of Cancer, make a Partill 
Sextile, and this is a strong signe or argument for performance of any 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


107 


thing, or that the matter is neer hand concluded when the aspect is so partill, 
and signifies good; and it’s as much a sign of present evill when mischief is 
threatened. 


A Platick Aspect is that which admits of the Orbs or Rayes of two Planets that 
signifie any matter: As if Venus be in the tenth degree of Taurus, and Saturn in 
eighteen degrees of Virgo, here Venus hath a Platick Trine, or is in a Platick 
Trine of Saturn, because she is within the Moity of both their Orbs; for the 
Moity of Saturn his Rayes or Orbs is five, and of Venus 4, and the distance 
betwixt them and their perfect aspect is eight degrees; and here | will again 
insert the Table of the quality of their Orbos, although | have in the Planets 
severall discriptions mentioned them; they stand that as | have found by the 
best Authors and my own Experience. 


d. m. d m. 
SATURN 10 0 according to others 9 0 
JUPITER 12 0 as some have wrote SS) 0 
MARS 4 30 all consent 7 0 
SUN 17 0 most say 15 O 
VENUS 8 0 many write but 7 0 
MERCURY 7 0 all consent onely f 0 
MOON 12 = 30 generally but 12 O 


| sometimes use the one, and sometimes the other, as my Memory best 
Remembereth them, and this without error. 


[APPLICATION.] Application of Planets is three severall wayes: 

First, when a Planet of more swift motion applies to one more slow and 
ponderous, they being both direct; as Mars in 10 degrees of Aries, Mercury 5: 
here Mercury applies to Conjunction of Mars. 


Secondly, when both Planets are retrograde, as Mercury in 10 degrees of 
Aries, and Mars in 9 of Aries; Mercury being not direct untill he hath made 
Conjunction with Mars; this is an ill Application and an argument either 
suddenly perfecting, or breaking off the business, according as the two 
Planets have signification. 


Thirdly, when a Planet is direct, and in fewer degrees, and a retrograde Planet 
being in more degrees of the Sign, as Mars being direct in 15 Aries; and 
Mercury retrograde in 17 Aries; this is an ill application, and in the Air shews 
great change; in a Question on sudden alteration: but more particularly | 
expresse Application as followeth. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


108 


[APPLICATION.] It is when two Planets are drawing neer together either by 
Conjunction or Aspect, viz, to a Sextile, Trine, Square or Opposition; where 
you must understand, that the Superiour Planet doe not apply to the inferiour 
(unless they be Retrograde, but ever the lighter to the more ponderous; as if 
Saturn be in 10 degree of Aries, and Mars be in the seventh degree of Aries 
the same Sign, here Mars being in fewer degrees, and a more light Planet 
then Saturn, applies to his Conjunction; if Mars had been in the seventh 
degree of Gemini, he had then applyed to a Sextile Aspect with Saturn: had 
Mars been in the seventh degree of Cancer, he had then applyed to a Square 
of Saturn; had he been in the seventh degree of Leo, he had applyed to a 
Trine of Saturn; had Mars been in the seventh degree of Libra, he had applyed 
to an Opposition of Saturn, and the true Aspect would have been when he had 
come to the same degree and minute wherein Saturn was: And you must 
know, that when Saturn is in Aries and casteth his Sextile, Square or Trine to 
any Planet in the like degrees of Gemini or Cancer or Leo, this Aspect is called 
a Sinister Sextile, Square or Trine, and it is an Aspect according to the 
succession of the Signes; for after Aries succeeds Taurus, then Gemini, the 
Cancer, &c. and so in order. Now if Saturn be in Aries, he also casteth his 
Sextile, Square, or Trine to any Planet that is in Aquarius, Capricorn or 
Sagittarius, and this is called a Dexter Aspect, and is against the order of 
Signes; but this Table annexed will more easily inform you. 


A Table of the Aspects of the Signes amongst one another. 


*/|/O}A] 2? */O}] A] oo? *¥/O]AlA 
Dexter |av/3|* Dexter | X|3/V Dexter ||P] Q 
a8 2. DN aR x I 
Sinister | I |@/|Q Sinister | 2|M, | # Sinister |ax| | Vv 
Dexter |X /avi6 Dexter |@/I|& Dexter |M,| | Tp 
re} MM mY x ® & 
Sinister | @/| 2/1 Sinister | Mh | 7 | 6 Sinister |3<| V | 3 
Dexter | V)X lax Dexter |2|@/ IZ Dexter |“ |M|2 
IL a Tew v RN N 
Sinister |  |TP)& Sinister | 7 | 6 |a~w Sinister |V| 0 | x 
Dexter | 30 /|V)X Dexter |TM/|2Q|@ Dexter | 6| 7 |, 
& ros TM, fe) x 4 
Sinister | MP ||M, Sinister | 6 | aw| Sinister | 6 | L| @ 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


109 


The use of the Table aforesaid. 


You may see in the 2, 3, 4, and fifth column, in the upper part of the Table, 
Sextile, Square, Trine, Opposition. 
You may see in the second line and first column 


Dexter 
Aries 
Sinister 


and in the four Columns over against them 


Aquarius Capricorn  Sagitarrius 
Libra 
Gemini Cancer Leo 


The meaning is thus; a Planet posited in Aries, and another in Aquarius in like 
degrees, he in Aries doth behold the other in Aquarius with a Sextile dexter 
Aspect. 


A Planet in Aries and another in Capricorn, he in Aries beholds the Planet in 
Capricorn with a Square dexter. 


A ro in Aries beholding another in Sagittarius, casts his Trifle dexter 
thither. 


A PLanet in Aries beholding another in Libra, casts his Opposite Aspect unto 
him. 


Again, over against Sinister, and under Aries you finde Gemini Cancer Leo; 
that is, Aries beholds Gemini with a Sextile Sinister: Cancer with a Square 
Sinister, Leo eith a Trine Sinister: Observe the dexter aspect is more forcible 
then the Sinister: this understand in the other Columns, viz, that Dexter 
Aspects are contrary to the succession of Signes, Sinister in order as they 
follow one another. 


Signes not beholding one another. 


vv re) It & NL Tp 2. Th x) mS RS x 
fe) a fe) NL Xs , TM, 2. TM, N © ah 
TM, I TM, aR 11972 aR re) x re) aR x RR 
2 © v © 
x x I 


These are called Signs inconjunct, or such, as if a Planet be in one of them, he 
cannot have any aspect to another in the sign underneath: as one in Aries can 
have no aspect to another in Taurus or Scorpio, or one in Taurus to one in 
Aries, Gemini, Libra or Sagittarius, so understand of the rest. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


110 


[SEPERATION.] Seperation, it is, in the first place, when two Planets are 
departed but six minutes distance from each other, as let Saturn be in 10 degr. 
and 25 min. of Aries and Jupiter in 10 degr. and 25 min. of Aries: now in these 
degrees and minutes they are in perfect Conjunction; but when Jupiter shall 
get into 10 degr. and 31 or 32 minutes of Aries, he shall be said to be 
seperating from Saturn; yet because Saturn hath 9 degr. allowed him for his 
rayes, and Jupiter hath also the same number allowed him, Jupiter cannot be 
said to be totally seperated or cleer from the rayes of Saturn, untill he hath got 
9. degrees distant from him, for the half of Jupiter his orbe is 4 degr. 30 min. 
and the half of Saturn his orbe is 4 degr. 30 min. added together they make 9. 
whole degrees; for every Planet that applies is allowed half his own orbs and 
half the orbs of that Planet from whom he seperates: As if Sun and Moon be in 
any aspect, the Moon shall then be seperated from the Sun, when she is fully 
distant from the Sun 7.degr. and 30.min. viz, half the orbs of the Sun, and 
6.degr. the moity of her own orbs; in all 13 degr. and 30 mi flutes. 


The exact knowledge hereof is various and excellent: For admit two Planets 
significators in Marriage at the time of the question, are lately seperated but a 
few minutes; | would then judge there had been a few days before great 
probability of effecting the Marriage, but now it hung in suspence, and there 
seemed some dislike or rupture in it; and as the significators doe seperate, so 
will the matter and affection of the parties more alienate and vary, and 
according to the number of degrees that the swifter Planet wanteth ere he can 
be wholly seperated from the more ponderous, so will it be so many weeks, 
dayes, moneths or yeers ere the two Lovers will wholly desist or see the 
matter quite broke off: The two Significators in moveable Signs, Angular and 
swift in motion, doth hasten the times; in common signs, the time will be more 
long; in fixed, a longer space of time will be required. 


[PROHIBITION.] Prohibition is when two Planets that signifie the effecting or 
bringing to conclusion any thing demanded, are applying to an Aspect; and 
before they can come to a true Aspect, another Planet interposeth either his 
body or aspect, to that thereby the matter propounded Is hindered and 
retarded; this is 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


111 


called Prohibition. For example, Mars is in 7. degr. of Aries, and Saturn is in 
the 12. Mars signifies the effecting my business when he comes to the body of 
Saturn, who promises the conclusion, the Sun is at the same time in 6. degr. 
of Aries. Now in regard that the Sun is swifter in motion then Mars, he will 
overtake Mars, and come to Conjunction with Saturn before Mars, whereby 
whatever Mars or Saturn did formerly signifie, is now prohibited by the Sun his 
first impediting Mars and then Saturn, before they can come to a true 
Conjunction. This manner of prohibition is called a Conjunctionall or Bodily 
prohibition; and you must know that the combustion of any Planet is the 
greatest misfortune that can be. 


[2.] The second manner of Prohibition is by Aspect, either Sextile, Square, 
Trifle , Opposition, viz. when two Planets are going to Conjunction; as Mars in 
7 degr. of Aries, Saturn in 15 of Aries; let us admit the Sun in 5. degr. of 
Gemini; he then being more swift than Mars in his diurnall motion, doth quickly 
overtake and passe by the Sextile dexter of Mars ( and comes before Mars 
can come to Conjunction) to a Sextile dexter of Saturn: This is called 
Prohibition by Aspect, in the same nature judge if the Aspect be Square, Trine, 
Opposition. 


[REFRENATION.] There’s another manner of Prohibition; by some more 
properly called Refrenation; as thus, Saturn in 12 degr. of Aries, Mars in 7 
degr. here Mars hastens to a Conjunction of Saturn, but before he comes to 
the tenth or eleventh degree of Aries he becomes Retrograde, and by that 
meanes refrains to come to a Conjunction of Saturn, who still moves forward 
in the Sign, nothing signifies by the former Conjunction will ever be effected. 


[TRANSLATION.] Translation of light and nature is, when a light Planet 
seperates from a more weighty one, and presently joyns to another more 
heavy; and its in this manner, Let Saturn be in 20. degr. of Aries: Mars in 15 of 
Aries, and Mercury in 16 of Aries; here Mercury being a swift Planet seperates 
from Mars, and translates the vertue of Mars unto Saturn. Its done also as well 
by any Aspect as by Conjunction. And the meaning hereof in judgment, is no 
more then thus; That if the matter or thing were promised by Saturn, then such 
aman as is signified by Mercury shall procure all the assistance a Mars man 
can doe unto Saturn, whereby the businesse may be the better effected; in 
Marriages, Lawsuits, and indeed in all vulgar questions Translation, is of great 
use, and ought well to be considered. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


112 


[RECEPTION.] Reception is when two Planets that are significators in any 
Question or matter, are in each others dignity; as Sun in Aries, and Mars in 
Leo; here is reception of these two Planets by Houses; and certainly this is the 
strongest and best of all receptions. It may be by Triplicity, term or face, or any 
essentiall dignity; as Venus in Aries, and Sun in Taurus; here is reception by 
triplicity, if the Duestion or Nativity by day: so Venus in the 24 of Aries, and 
Mars in the 16 of Gemini; here is reception by term, Mars being in the terms of 
Venus, and she in his terms. 


The use of this is much; so many times when as the effecting of the matter is 
denyed by the Aspects, or when the significators have no aspect to each 
other, or when it seems very doubtfull what its promised by Square or 
Opposition of the significators, yet if mutuall Reception happen betwixt the 
principall significators, the thing is brought to passe, and that without any great 
trouble, and suddenly to the content of both parties. 


[PEREGRINE.] A Planet is then said to be Peregrine, when he is in the 
degrees of any Sign wherein he hath no essentiall dignity: As Saturn in the 
tenth degree of Aries, that Sign being not_his House, Exaltation, or of his 
Triplicity, or he having in that degree either Term or Faces, he is then said to 
be Peregrine; had he been in 27, 28 &c. of Aries, he could not be termed 
Peregrine, because then he is in his own Terme. 


So the Sun in any part of Cancer is Peregrine, having no manner of dignity in 
that Sign. 


This is very much materiall in all Questions, to know the Peregrine Planet, 
especially in questions of Theft; for ever almost the significator of the Theef is 
known by the Peregrine Planet posited in an Angle, or the second House. 


[VOID OF COURSE.] A Planet is voyd of course, when he is seperated from a 
Planet, nor doth forthwith, during his being in that Sign, apply to any other: 
This is most usually in the Moon; in judgments doe you carefully observe 
whether she be void of course yea or no; you shall seldom see a businesse 
goe handsomely forward when she is so. 


[FRUSTRATION.] Frustration is, when a swift Planet would corporally joyn 


with a more ponderous, but before they can come to a Conjunction, the more 
weighty Planet is joyned to another, and so the Conjunction of 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


113 


the first is frustrated, as Mercury in ten degrees of Aries, Mars twelve, Jupiter 
in thirteen of Aries; here Mercury strives to come to Conjunction with Mars, but 
Mars first gets to conjunction with Jupiter; whereby Mercury is frustrated of the 
Conjunction of Mars: in Questions is signifies as much as our common 
Proverb, The Dogges quarrell, a third gets the Bone. 


[HAYZ.] HAYZ is when a Masculine and Diurnall Planet is in the day time 
above the earth, and in a Masculine Sign, and so when a Feminine, Nocturnall 
Planet in the night is in a Feminine Sign and under the earth: In Questions it 
usually shews the content of the Querent at time of the Question, when his 
significator is so found. 


[SUPERIOUR & INFERIOUR PLANETS.] Saturn, Jupiter and Mars being 
placed above the Orbe of the Sun, are called the superiour, ponderous and 
more weighty Planets; Venus, Mercury and Luna are called the inferiour 
Planets, being under the Orbe of the Sun. 


[COMBUSTION.] A Planet is said to be Combust of the Sun, when in the same 
Sign where the Sun is in, he is not distant from the Sun eight degrees and 
thirty minutes, either before or after the Sun; as Jupiter in the tenth degree of 
Aries, and Sun in the eighteenth of Aries; here Jupiter is Combust: or let the 
Sun be in eighteen of Aries, and Jupiter in twenty eight degrees of Aries, here 
Jupiter is Combust: and you must observe a Planet is more afflicted when the 
Sun hastens to conjunction of him, then when the Sun receds from him; in 
regard it’s the body of the Sun that doth afflict. | allow the moyity of his own 
Orbs to shew the time of Combustion, and not of Jupiter; for by that rule 
Jupiter should not be combust before he is within four degrees and a half of 
the Sun. | know many are against this opinion. 


Use which you find most verity in: the significator of the Querent combust, 
shews him or her in great fear, and over powred by some great person. 


[UNDER THE SUN BEAMS.] A Planet is said to be under the Sun-beams, 
untill he is fully elongated or distant from his body 17 degr. either before or 
after him. 


[CAZIMI, OR IN THE HEART OF THE SUN.] A Planet is in the heart of the 
Sun, or in Cazimi, when he is not removed from him 17 min. or is within 17 
min. forward or backward, as Sun in 15.30 Taurus, Mercury 15.25. of Taurus: 
here Mercury is in Cazimi, and all Authors doe hold a Planet in Cazimi to be 
fortified thereby; you must observe all Planets may be in 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


114 


Combustion of the Sun, but he with none, and that Combustion can onely be 
by personall conjunction in one Sign, not by any aspect, either Sextile, Square, 
Trine or Opposition, his Square or Opposite aspects are afflicting, but doe not 
Combure or cause the Planet to be in Combustion. 


[ORIENTALL, OCCIDENTALL.] Saturn, Jupiter and Mars, are Orientall of the 
Sun, from the time of their conjunction with him, untill they come to his 
Opposition: from Whence untill again they come to conjunction, they are said 
to be Occidentall; to be Orientall is no other thing then to rise before the Sun: 
to be Occidentall is to be seen above the Horizon, or to set after the Sun is 
down: Mercury and Venus can make no Sextile , Square, Trine or Opposition 
to the Sun: their Orientality is when they are in fewer degrees of the Sign the 
Sun is, or in the Sign preceding; their Occidentality, when they are in more 
degrees of the Sign the Sun is in , or next subsequent: for you must know 
Mercury cannot be more degrees removed from the Sun then 28. nor Venus 
more then 48. though some allow a few more. The Moon is Orientall of the 
Sun from the time of her opposition to he conjunction, and Occidentall from the 
time of her Conjunction to Opposition; and the reason hereof is, because she 
iat ca the Sun in swiftnesse of motion, and so presently gets further into 
the sign, &c. 


[BESIEGING.] Besieging is, when any Planet is places betwixt the bodies of 
the two Malevolent Planets Saturn and Mars: as Saturn in 15. Aries, Mars in 
10. of Aries, Venus in 13. Aries: here Venus is besieged by the two infortunes, 
and it represents in questions, a Man going out of Gods blessing into the warm 
Sun; | mean is Venus be a Significatrix that time in time in the figure. 


There are other accidents belonging to the Planets one amongst another 


mentioned by the Ancients, but of so little purpose in Judgment, that | have 
cleerly omitted them. 


[DIRECTION IS.] When a Planet moveth forward in the Signe, as going out of 
13 degr. into 14. and so along. 


[RETROGRADE IS.] When a Planet goeth backward, as out of 10 degr. into 9, 
8, 7, &C. 


[STATIONARY ey teat he moves not at all, as the superiours doe not 2, 3, 
or 4 dayes before Retrogradation. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


115 


A ready Table whereby to examine the Fortitudes and 
Debilities of the Planets. 


Essential Dignities 


A Planet in his owne house, or in 


mutual reception with another Planet by 


house, shall Have Dignities. 

In his exaltation, or reception by 
exaltation 

In his owne Triplicity 

In his owne Terme 

Decanate or Face 


Accidental! Fortitudes 


In the Mid-heaven or Ascendant 
In the 7th, 4th and 11th houses 
In the 2nd and 5th 

In the 9th 

In the 3rd house 


Direct (the © and ) are always so, as 


to them this is voyd) 
Swift in motion 


4 4% o when Orientall 
% and ? when Occidentall 


The » encreasing, or when she is 


Occidentall 


Free from Combustion and © Beams 


In the heart of the ©, or Cazimi 
In partill x with 4 and ¢ 


In partill ¢ with 2 
In partill Ato 4 and ¢@ 


In partill x to 4 and 9? 


In & with Cor Leonis, in 24 degr. 2 


Orin o with Spica mp in 18 & 


Debilities 


In his Detriment 


In his Fall 


Peregrine 


Accidental Debilities 


In the twelfth House 
In the 8th and 6th 
Retrograde 

Slow in motion 

4 4% o& Occidentall 
9 ¥% Orientall 


) decreasing in light 
Combust of the © 


Under the © Beames 
Partill « with ¥ or & 


Partill x with U 
Beseiged of »% and & 
Partill of 4 or & 


Partill oof % ord 


In x with Caput Agol in 20 3, or 
within 5 degrees 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


PNMNAN OA 


kK AB OO PD 


Oo 


116 


| forebeare here to explane the Table, because | shall doe it better hereafter, 
upon some Example. 


Two necessary Tables of the Signes, fit to be understood by every 
Astrologer or Practioner. 


Degrees masculine and 
femine 


Y MAS. 8, 15, 30 
FEM. 9, 22 


Degr. light, darke, 
smoakie, voyd 


D. 3, L.8, D.16, L.20 
V. 24, L.29, V.30 


Degr. deepe 
or pitted 


Degr. lame 
or deficient 


Degr. 
encreasing 
fortune 


6 MAS. 11,21,30 
FEM. 5, 17, 24 


D3, bef, Vi12, LAls 
V.20, L.28, D.30 


mx MAS. 16, 26 
FEM. 5, 22, 30 


L.4, D.7,L.12, V.16 
L.22, D.27, V.30 


MAS. 2, 10, 23, 30 
FEM. 8, 12, 27 


& 


L.12, D.14, V.18 
SM.20, L.28, V.30 


9 10 1112 
131415 


, MAS.5, 15, 30 
FEM. 8, 23 


D.10, SM.20 
V.25, L.30 


18 27 
28 


1 MAS. 12, 30 
FEM. 8, 20 


D.5, L.8, V.10, L.16 
SM. 22, V.27, D.30 


MAS. 5, 20, 30 
FEM. 15, 27 


L.5,D.10, L.18 
D.21, L.27, V.30 


Mm MAS. 4, 17, 30 
FEM. 14, 25 


D.3, L.8, V.14, L.22 
SM. 24, V.29, D.30 


x MAS.2, 12, 30 
FEM. 5, 24 


L.9,D.12,L.19 
SM.23, L.30 


® MAS. 11, 30 
FEM. 19 


D7, L:10,5.15, E19 
D.22, V.25, D.30 


ax MAS. 5, 21, 27 
FEM. 15, 25, 30 


SM.4, L.9, D.13 
L.23, V.25, D.30 


* MAS. 10, 23, 30 
FEM. 20, 28 


D.6, L.12, D.18 
L.22, V.25, L.28, D.30 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


117 


The Use of the Table. 


Many times it happens, that it is of great concernment to the Querent to know, 
whether a Woman be with childe of a Male or Female; or whether the Theef be Man 
or Woman, &c. When it shall so chance that neither the Angles, or the sex of the 
Planet, or the Signes doe discover it, but that the testimonies are equall; then if you 
consider the degrees of the Signe wherein the Moon is, and wherein the Planet 
significator of the thing or party quesited is, and the degree of the Cuspe of the 
House signifying the person quesited after; and see by the second Column whether 
they be in Masculine or Feminine Degrees, you may pose your judgment, by 
concluding a Masculine party, if they be posited in Masculine degrees; or Feminine, if 
they be in Feminine degrees. You see the first eight degrees of Aries are Masculine, 
the ninth degree is Feminine, from nine to fifteen is Masculine, from fifteen to two and 
twenty is Feminine, from two and twenty to thirty is Masculine; and so as they stand 
directed in all the Signes. 


The third Column tels you there are in every Signe certain Degrees, some called 
Light, Dark, Smoakie, Void, &c. the use hereot is thus: 


Let a Signe ascend in a Nativity or Question, if the Ascendant be in those Degrees 
you see are called Light, the Childe or Querent shall be more fair; if the degree 
ascending be of those we call Dark, his Complexion shall be nothing so fair, but more 
obscure and dark; and if he be born deformed, the deformity shall be more and 
greater; but if he be deformed when the light degrees of a Sign ascend, the 
imperfection shall be more tolerable. 


And if the Moon or the Degree ascending be in those degrees we call Voyd, be the 
Native or Querent fair or foul, his understanding will be small, and his judgment lesse 
then the world supposeth, and the more then conferrest with him, the greater defect 
shalt thou finde in him. If the Ascendant, the Moon or either of them be in those 
degrees we call Smoakie, the person inquiring or Native, shall neither be very fair nor 
very 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


118 


foule, but of a mixt Complexion, Stature or condition, betwixt fair and foule. betwixt 
tall and of little Stature, and so in condition neither very judicious or a very Asse. 


You see the three first Degrees of Aries are Dark, from three to eight are light, from 
eight to sixteen are Dark, from sixteen to twenty are Light, from twenty to four and 
twenty are Voyd, from four and twenty to nine and twenty are Light, the last Degree is 
Voyd. 


[DEGREES, DEEP OR PITTED.] Degrees deep or pitted presented in the fourth 
Column have this signification, that if either the Moon or the degree ascending or 
Lord of the Ascendant be in any of them, it shews the Man at a stand in the question 
he asks. nit knowing which way to turn himself and that he had need of help to bring 
him into a better condition; for as a man cast into a Ditch doth not easily get out 
without help, so no more can this querent in the case he is without assistance. 


[CALLED BY SOME AZIMENE DEGREES.] Degrees lame and deficient are those 
mentioned in the fifth Column; the meaning whereof is thus, If in any question you 
finde him that demands the question, or in a Nativity, if you finde the Native defective 
in any member, or infected with an inseperable disease, halting, blindnesse, 
deafnesse &c. you may then suppose the native hath either one of these Azimene 
degr. ascending at his birth, or the Lord of the Ascendant, or the Moon in one of 
them: in a Question or Nativity, if you see the Querent lame naturally, crooked, or 
vitiated in some member, and on the sudden you can in the figure give no present 
satisfaction to your self, doe i then consider the Degree ascending, or Degree 
wherein the Moon is in, or the Lord of the Ascendant, or principall Lord of the Nativity 
or Question, and these is no doubt that you shall finde one or more of them in 
Azimene degrees. 


[DEGREES INCREASING FORTUNE.] These Degrees are related in the fifth 
Column, and tend to this understanding, that if the Cuspe of the second House, or if 
the Lord of the second house, or Jupiter, or the Part of Fortune be in, any of those 
degrees, it’s and argument of much wealth, and that the Native or Querent will be 
rich. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


119 


A Table shweing what members in Mans Body every Planet 
signifieth in any of the twelve Signes 


b 


y 


ro 


? 


9 


D) 


Brest, Arm 


Neck, 
Throat, 
Heart, 
Belly 


Belly, 
Head 


Reines, 
Feet. 


Secrets, 
Legs. 


Knees, 
Head. 


Heart, Brest 


Shoulder, 
Arms, 
Belly, 
Neck. 


Reines, 
Throat. 


Secrets- 
members 
, Head. 


Thighs, 
Feet. 


Legs, 
Throt. 


Belly, Heart 


Brest, 
Reines, 
Secrets. 


Secrets, 
Arms, 
Brest. 


Legs, 
Ancles. 


Thighs, 
Throat. 


Knees, 
Head. 


Feet, 
Shoulder 
s, Arms, 
Thighs. 


Reines, 
Belly, 
Secrets 


Heart, 
Secrets, 
Thighs. 


Thighs, 
Brest. 


Knees. 


Knees, 
Shoulder, 
Arms. 


Legs, 
Throat, 
Eyes. 


Head, 
Brest, 
Stomack. 


Secrets, 
Reines 


Belly, 
Thighs, 
Knees. 


Knees, 
Heart, 
Belly. 


Head. 


Legs, 
Brest, 
Heart. 


Feet, 
Arms, 
Shoulder, 
Throat. 


Throat, 
Stomack, 
Heart. 


Thighs, 
Secrets 
Feet 


Reines, 
Knees. 


Legs, 
Belly. 


Throat. 


Feet, 
Stomack, 
Heart, 
Belly. 


Head, 
Brest, 
Heart. 


Arms, 
Shoulder 
s, Bowels 


Knees, 
Thighs. 


Secrets, 
Legs, 
Head, 
Eyes. 


Feet, 
Reines, 
Secrets. 


Shoulder, 
Arms. 


Head, 
Smal 
guts. 


Throat, 
Heart, 
Stomack, 
Belly. 


Brest, 
Reines, 
Heart, 
Belly. 


Knees, 
Legs. 


Thighs, 
Feet. 


Head, 
Secrets, 
Arms, 
Thighs. 


Brest, 
Heart. 


Throat, 
Reines, 
Secrets. 


Shoulder, 
Arms, 
Bowels, 
Back. 


Stomack, 
Heart, 
Secrets, 
Belly. 


Legs, Feet 


Knees, 
Head, 
Thighs. 


Throat, 
Thighs, 
Hands, 
Feet. 


Heart, 
Belly. 


Shoulder, 
Arms, 
Secrets, 
Thighs. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


Brest, 
Reines, 
Heart, 
Secrets. 


Bowels, 
Thighs, 
Back. 


120 


b 4 ro © ? 9 D) 


Head, Legs, Arms, Belly, Brest, Stomack, |Reines, 
Feet Neck, Shoulder, |Back. Heart, Heart, Knees, 
Eyes, Knees, Thighs. |Secrets. /Thighs 
Knees. __|Legs. 
Neck, Feet, Brest, Reines, |Heart, Bowels, |Secrets, 


Head. Arms, Legs, Secrets. |Knees. |Thighs, /Legs, 
Shoulder, |Heart. Heart. /Ancles. 
Brest. 
Arms, Head, Heart, |Secrets, |Belly, Reines, |Thighs, 
Shoulder, |Brest, Feet, Thighs. |Legs, Knees, __|Feet. 
Neck Heart. Belly, Neck, Secrets, 
Ancles. Throat. _|Thighs 


The Use and Reason of the Former Table. 


It was well neer four yeers after | had studied Astrology, before | could finde any 
reason, why the Planets in every of the Signes should signifie the members as 
mentioned in the Table: at last, reading the 88. Aphorisms of Hermes, | understood 
the meaning of it, viz. Erit im-pedimentum circa 111am partem corporis quam 
significat signum, quod fuerit nativitatis tempore impeditum. There will be some 
impediment in or neer that part of the body, which it signified by the Sign that shall be 
afflicted at the time of the Birth The use of all comes to thus much: 


That if you would know where any Disease is, | mean in what member of the body, 
see in what Sign the significator of the sick Party is, and what part of mans body that 
Planet signifies in that Sign, which you may doe by the former Table, in that member 
or part of the body shall you say the sick party is grieved or diseased. 


As if Saturn be Significator of the sick party, and at time of your 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


121 


Question in Gemini; have recourse to your Table, and you see Saturn in Gemini a 
Disease in the Belly or heart &c. Do so in the rest. 


Now the reason of this signification of every Planet in such or such a Signe is this: 


Every Planet in his own House or Signe, governeth the Head; in the second Signe 
from his House, the neck; in the third Signe from his house, the Arms and Shoulders; 
and so successively through the twelve Signes: as Saturn in Capricorn ruleth the 
Head, in Aquarius the Neck, in Pisces Arms and Shoulders; so yaaa in Sagittarius 
ruleth the Head, in Capricorn the Neck, in Aquarius the Arms and Shoulders. 


The Moon observes the same order as the rest; yet the Arabians, from whom this 
learning is, doe allow her in Aries the Head as well as the Knees: The Head, because 
Aries signifies so much: The Knees, because Aries is the ninth Sign from Cancer. 


You may observe this in the marks of mans Body, and many other judgments, and 
make singular use of it; ever remembering this, the more the Sign is vitiated, the 
greater mole or scarre; or the neerer to an Azimene, Pitted or Dificient degree of the 
Sign, the stronger is the deformity, sicknesse, &c, 


CONSIDERATIONS before Judgment 


At the Ancients that have wrote of questions, doe give warning to the Astrologer, 
that before he deliver judgment he well consider whether the Figure is radicall and 
capable of judgment; the Question then shall be taken for radicall, or fit to be judged, 
when as the Lord of the hour at the time of proposing the Question, and erecting the 
Figure, and the Lord of the Ascendant or first House, are of one Triplicity, or be one, 
or of the same nature. 


As for example; let the Lord of the hour be Mars, let the Sign of Scorpio, Cancer or 
Pisces ascend, this Question is then radicall, because Mars is Lord of the Hour, and 
of the Watry Triplicity, or of those Signs Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces. 


Again, let the Lord of the hour be Mars, and Aries ascend, the Question shall be 
radicall, because Mars is both Lord of the hour and Sign ascending. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


122 


Let the Lord of the hour be Mars, and let the Sign Leo ascend, here, although the 
Sun is one of the Lords of the Fiery Triplicity, and the Lord of the Signe Leo, yet shall 
the Question be judged; because the Sun, who is Lord of the Ascendant, and Mars 
who is Lord of the hour, are both of one nature, viz. Hot and Dry. 


When either 00. degrees, or the first or second degrees of a Sign ascend (especially 
in Signes of short ascentions, viz. Capricorn, Aquarius, Aries, Taurus, Gemini, you 
may not adventure judgment, unlesse the Querent be very young, and his 
corporature, complexion and moles or scarres of his body agree with the quality of 
the Signe ascending. 


If 27, 28, 29 degrees ascend of any Signe, it’s no wayes safe to give judgment, 
except the Querent be in yeers corresponding to the number of degrees ascending; 
or unlesse the Figure be set upon a certain time, viz, a man went away or fled at 
such a time precise; hope you may judge, because it’s no propounded question. 


It's not safe to judge when the Moon is in the later degrees of a Signe, especially in 
Gemini, Scorpio or Capricorn; or as some say, when she is in Via Combusta, which 
is, when she is in the last 15 degrees of Libra, or the first fifteen degrees of Scorpio. 


All manner of matters goe hardly on (except the principall significators be very strong) 
when the Moon is void of course; yet somewhat she performs if void of course, and 
be either in Taurus, Cancer, Sagittarius or Pisces. 


You must also be wary, when in any question propounded you find the Cusp of the 
seventh house afflicted, or the Lord of that house Retrograde, or impedited, and the 
matter at that time not concerning the seventh house, but belonging to any other 
house, it's an argument the judgment of the Astrologer’s will give small content, or 
aay ting please the Querent; for the seventh house generally hath signification of 
the Artist. 


The Arabians, as Alkindus and others, doe deliver these following rules, as very fit to 
be considered before a Question be judged. 


Viz. if Saturn be in the Ascendant, especially Retrograde, the matter of that Question 
seldom or never comes to good. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


123 


Saturn in the seventh either corrupts the judgment of the Astrologer, or is a Signe the 
matter propounded will come from one misfortune to another. 


If the Lord of the Ascendant be Combust, neither question propounded will take, or 
Querent be regulated. 


The Lord of the 7th unfortunate, or in his fall, or Terms of the Infortunes, the Artist 
shall scarce give a solid judgment. 


When the testimonies of Fortunes and Infortunes are equal, deferre judgment, it’s not 
possible to know which way the Ballance will turn: however, deferre you your opinion 
till another question better informs you. 


CHAP. XX. 


What Significator, Querent and Questied are; and an 
Introduction to the Judgment of a Question. 


Ts Querent is he or she that propounds the question, and desires resolution: the 
Quesited is he or she, or the thing sought and enquired after. 


The Significator is no more then that Planet which ruleth the house that signifies the 
thing demanded: as if Aries is ascending, Mars being the Lord of Aries, shal be 
significator of the Querent, viz, the Sign ascending shall in part signifie his 
corporature, body or stature, the Lord of the Ascendant, the Moon and Planet in the 
Ascendant, or that the Moon or Lord of the Ascendant are in aspect with, shall shew 
his quality or conditions equally mixed together; so that let any Signe ascend, what 
Planet is Lord of that Signe, shall be called Lord of the House, or Significator of the 
person enquiring, &c. 


So that in the first place therefore, When any Question is propounded, the Signe 
ascending and his Lord are always given unto him or her that asks the question. 


2. You must then consider the matter propounded, & see to which of the twelve 


houses it doth properly belong: when you have found the house, consider the Sign 
and Lord of that Sign, how, 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


124 


and in what Signe and what part he is placed, how dignified, what aspect he hath to 
the Lord of the Ascendant, who impedites your Significator, who is friend unto him, 
viz, what Planet it is, and what house he is Lord of, or in what house posited; from 
such a man or woman signified by that Planet, shall you be furthered or hindered; or 
of such relation unto hee as that Planet signifies; if Lord of such a house, such an 
enemy, if Lord of such a house as signifieth enemies, then an enemy verily; if of a 
friendly house, a friend: The whole naturall key to all Astrology reflect in the words 
preceding rightly understood: By the Examples following | shall make all things more 
plain; for | doe not desire, or will reserve anything whereby the Learner may be kept 
In suspence of right understanding what is useful for him, and most fit to be Known. 


In every question we doe give the Moon as the Cosignificator with the querent or 
Lord of the Ascendant (some have also allowed the Planet from whom the Moon 
seperated as a Significator; which | no way approve of, or in my practice could ever 
find any Verity therein.) 


In like manner they joyned in judgment the Planet to whom the Moon applyed at time 
of the question, as Cosignificator with the Lord of the house of the thing quesited, or 
thing demanded. 


Having well considered the severall applications and seperations of the Lords of 
those houses signifying your question, as also the Moon, the Scite of Heaven and 
quality of the aspect the Moon, and each significator hath to other, you may begin to 
judge and consider whether the thing demanded will come to pass yea or no; by 
what, or whose means, the time when, and whether it will be good for the Querent to 
proceed further in his demands yea or no. 


CHAP. XxX. 


To know whether a thing demanded will be brought to 
perfection yea or nay. 


Te Ancients have delivered unto us, that there are four wayes or means, which 
discover whether one question 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


125 


or the thing demanded shall be accomplished yea or not. 


[CONJUNCTION.] First, by Conjunction; when as therefore you find the Lord of the 
Ascendant, and Lord of that house which signifies the thing demanded, hastening to 
a Conjunction, and in the first house, or in any Angle, and the significators meet with 
no Prohibition or Refrenation, before they come to perfect Conjunction; you may then 
judge, that the thing sought after, shall be brought to passe without any manner of let 
or impediment, the sooner, if the Significators be in swift motion, and Essentially or 
Accidentally strong; but if this Conjunction of the Significators be in a Succedant 
house, it will be perfected, but not as soon: if in Cadent houses, with infinite losse of 
time, some difficulty, and much strugling. 


[ASPECT OF SEXTILE OR TRINE.] Things are also brought to passe, when as the 
principall signifiers apply by Sextile or Trine aspect out of good Houses and places 
where they are essentially well dignified (and meet with no malevolent Aspect to 
intervene are they come to be in perfect Sextile or Trifle; | mean to the partill Sextill or 
Tryne.) 


[ASPECTS OF SQUARE AND OPPOSITION.] Things are also produced to 
perfection, when the Significators apply by Square aspect, provided each Planet 
have dignity in the Degrees wherein they are, and apply out of proper and good 
Houses, otherwise not. Sometimes it happens, that a matter is brought to passe 
when the Significators have applyed by Opposition, but it hath been, when there hath 
been mutuall reception by House, and out of friendly Houses, and the Moon 
seperating from the Significator of the thing demanded; | have rarely seen any thing 
brought to perfection by this way of opposition; but the Querent had been better the 
thing had been undone; for if the Question was concerning Marriage, the parties 
seldom agreed, but were ever wrangling and jangling, each party repining at his evill 
choice, laying the blame upon their covetous Parents, as having no minde to it 
themselves: and if the Question was about Portion or Monies, the Querent did, its 
true, recover his Money or Portion promised, but it cost him more to procure it in suit 
of Law, then the debt was worth, &c. and so have | seen it happen in many other 
things, &c. 


Ul eta Things are brought to perfection by Translation of Light and 
ature, in this manner. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


126 


When the Significators both of Querent and Quesited are seperated from Conjunction 
or Sextile or Trine aspect of each other, and some one Planet or other doth seperate 
himself from one of the Significators, of whom he is received either by House, 
Triplicity, or Term, and then this Planet doth apply to the other Significator by 
Conjunction or aspect, before he meeteth, with the Conjunction or aspect of any 
other Planet, he then translates the force, influence and virtue of the first Significaotr 
to the other, and then this intervening Planet (or such a man or woman as is signifies 
by that Planet) shall bring the matter in hand to perfection. 


Consider what house the Planet interposing or translating the nature and light of the 
two Planets is Lord of , and describe him or her, and say to the party, that such a 
party shall doe good in the business of, &c. viz, if Lord of the second, a good Purse 
affects the matter; if Lord of the third, a Kinsman or Neighbor; and so of all the rest of 
the Houses: of which more shall be said in the following Judgments. 


[COLLECTION.] Matters are also brought to perfection, when as the two principall 
Significators doe not behold one another, but both cast their severall Aspects to a 
more weighty Planet then themselves, and they both receive him in some of their 
essentiall dignities; then shall that Planet who thus collects both their Lights, bring the 
thing demanded to perfection: which signifies no more in Art then this, that a Person 
somewhat interested in both parties and described and signified by that Planet, shall 
perform, effect and conclude the thing which otherwayes could not be perfected: As 
many times you see two fall at variance, and of themselves cannot think of any way 
of accommodation, when suddenly a Neighbour or friend accidently reconciles all 
differences, to the content of both parties: And this is called Collection. 


Lastly, things are sometimes perfected by the dwelling of Planets in houses, viz, 
when the Significator of the thing demanded is casually posited in the Ascendant; as 
if one demand if he shall obtain éuch a Place or Dignity, if then the Lord of the tenth 
be placed in the Ascendant, he shall obtain the Benefit, Office, Place or Honour 
desired: This rule of the Ancients holds not true, or is consentanious to reason: 
except 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


127 


they will admit, that when the Moon, besided this dwelling in house, doth transferre 
the light of the Significator of the thing desired, to the Lord of the Ascendant; for it 
was well observed that the application of the Significators shew inclination of the 
parties, but seperation usually privation; that is, in more plain terms, when you see 
the principall Significators of the Querent, and thing or party quesited after seperated, 
there’s then little hops of the effecting or perfecting what is desired, (notwithstanding 
this dwelling in houses) but if there be application, the parties seem willing, and the 
matter is yet kept on foot, and there is great probability of perfecting it, or that things 
will come to a further treaty. 


In all Questions you are generally to observe this Method following. 


As the Ascendant represents the person of the Querent, and the second his Estate, 
the third his Kindred, the fourth his Father, the fifth his Children, the sixth his Servant 
or Sicknesse, the seventh his Wife, the eighth the manner of his Death, the ninth his 
Religion or journeys, the tenth his Estimation or honour, the eleventh his Friends, the 
twelfth his secret Enemies. 


So you must also understand, that when one asks concerning a Woman or any party 
signified by the seventh House and the Lord thereof, that then the 7th House shall be 
her Ascendant and signifie her person, the eight House shall signifie her Estate and 
be her second, the ninth House shall signifie her Brethern and Kindred, the tenth 
shall represent her Father, the eleventh her Children or whether apt to have Children, 
the twelfth her Sicknesse and Servants, the first House her Sweetheart, the second 
House her Death, the third her Journey, the fourth her Mother, the fifth her Friends, 
the sixth her sorrow, care and private Enemies. 


Let the Question be of or concerning Churchman, Minister, or the Brother of the wife 
or sweet-heart, the ninth House shall represent each of these, but the tenth House 
shall be Significator of his Substance, the eleventh House of his Brethern, and so in 
order: and so in all manner of Questions the House signifying the party shall be his 
Ascendant or first House, 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


128 


the next his second House, and so continuing round about tne whole Heavens or 
twelve Houses. 


If a question be made of a King, the tenth is his first house, the eleventh his second, 
and so orderly: but in Nativities, the Ascendant ever signifieth the party born, weather 
King or Beggar: These things preceding being well understood, you may proceed to 
judgment; not that it is necessary you have all that is wrote, in your memory exactly, 
but that you be able to Know when you are in an errour, when not; when to judge a 
question, when not: | should also have shewed how to take the Part of Fortune, but 
that | will doe in the first Example, the use of the Part of Fortune being divers, but 
hardly understood rightly by any author | ever met with: However note, if a King 
propound an Astrologicall Question, the Ascendant is for him, as well as for any 
meaner party; and all the houses in order, as for any vulgar person: For Kings are 
earth, and no more then men; and the time is comming &c. when. 


http://www.worldastrology.net 


