RYAN 



ISCELLANY. 



jetties. 


BRIHAT JATAKA 

OF 

VARAHA MlHIRA. 

TRANSLATED INTO ENGLISH 


BT 

N. Chidambaram Iyer, b . a., p. t . s. 

FOUNDER 

or xh« 

TIRUVADI JOTISTANTRA SABHA. 


[Registered Copyright.] 


JR at t a 8: 

W!1K1M) TBS rOSTIB FBBf8, 28 BVKDAlL'a BOAS, Tll'lKT. 

1886 . 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



Ind L 3fcl0.4.<? 



Digitized by ^.ooQle 





OAAAJL4 


.Vxj'. 

I , 


INTRODUCTION. 



Hu 


There is probably not one subject which is so ill tm* 
derstood, which so many people pretend to know, and on 
which so many arc prepared to express an opinion, as* the 
subject of Astrology. The Indian proverb truly says that 
there is no man who is not a bit of a physician and an 
astrologer / and it is equally true that there is no subject 
which is so ill understood as these two. The fact is that 
the broad medical and astrological principles are so many 
that everybody of necessity learns a few of these, but 
experiences a difficulty in mastering all of them* 

It would be interesting to note the various subjects 
with which astrology is confounded* Persons with well* 
developed intuitions are often found to make correct pre- 
dictions of events. The Yogis are persons of this descrip¬ 
tion. Their peculiar knowledge is certainly not the 
result of any study of astrological works. We also find 
another class of men who imitate these men and also 
make striking statements . Birmingham gold is often taken 
for sterling gold / German silver for pure silver / and we have 
a variety of inferior stones, white, red and green that are 
often mistaken for diamonds, rubies and emeralds* The 
world is full of this dual character of things. Every depart* 
meut of true knowledge has its inferior counterpart / and so 
we have a number of men who, possessiug no occult powers* 
but securing tho help of a few elemental spirits, practise 
imposition on the ignorant public. But the world is not 
without a touchstone to detect the hollowness of their pre¬ 
tensions: these men will give you a few correct particulars 
regarding remote past events, a great deal of particulars re- 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



2 


INTRODUCTION. 


garding present events, one or two particulars re- 
garding the immediate future, and no particulars at alt 
about the distant future. I have known these men and 
tested the trutli of their statements. These men pretend to 
be astrologers. Some of them carry no books at all and 
make amazing statements touching past events ini prose 
and verse in an extempore sing-song fashion and without 
the least effort, even though the questioner is a perfect 
stranger ,* while others show you some huge antique cadjan 
book and pretend to read from its pages. This was exactly 
the way in which Col. Olcottls questions were recently an¬ 
swered by the Brahmin astrologer who pretended to read 
from the pages of the works of the Great Bheemakavi (vide 
May, 1885, issue of the Theosophist). I am sure that nei¬ 
ther Co). Olcottgnor bis intelligent friends ever had a look 
into the book to see whether what was read out was really 
written there, and if so, whether the writing was not afresh 
one. In all these cases the astrologer, if he is one at all, 
doggedly refuses to allow others to look into his book ; for, 
be says, he is not 1 permitted by the book deity to do so ! 
There is a more wonderful man in Pondicherry at present. 
He pretends to read from the works of Nandikeswara. 
Such astrologers are making vast sums of money. The 
statements they make are really puzzling ones. But for 
these and the way in which they are made, the utter want 
of preparation and the like, I should have been inclined to 
discard the element of the help of the elemental spirits. 
Let those who would object to this, examine the matter and 
then pronounce an opinion. 

Nothing can be more funny than to find young men 
especially, taking] up astrology as their first subject of 
attack iu their public utterances. It is a subject to which 
they pay little or no attention except for purposes of ridi¬ 
cule- To all your questions, how do you prove this state* 


Digitized by 


Google 



IKTBODUCTIOlf. 


s 


meat and how do you prove that: their One ready reply is 
that tbeir common sense tells them so* They forget 
that common sense is a sense which changes in its nature 
as one advances in his study, and it ehanges So much that 
the common sense of one age is different from the common 
sense of another age, the common sense of one nation or of 
one individual is different from the common sense of ano¬ 
ther nation or individual. Where proof is advanced by a 
few, it is equally interesting to examine it. The proof is 
that such and such astrologers made sueh and such pre- % 
dictions and that the predictions have failed—and ergo, 
astrology is no science ! It is evidently taken for granted 
that the astrologer was really learned in the science, and 
that there were not those numerous errors of data to 
mislead him- 

Another objection to the science is that astrologically 
the fortunes of two persons born at the same moment of 
time but in the opposite quarters of the globe, must be the 
same, but that they cannot be and are not the same- Here 
is an ignorance betrayed regarding the elemeutary principles 
of the science. It is true that the planetary positions are 
nearly the same except for the small matter of parallax. But 
it is not the planets alone that go to shape one’s fortunes- 
Time of birth, which is represented by the Lagtia or the 
rising sign, has a great deal to do with it- In other words, 
because the local times of the two places are different, the 
Lagnas must be different,* for when the 20th degree of Leo, 
for instance, is in contact with the horizon here, the 20th 
degree of Aquaries will be in contact with the horizon 
of our just antipodes at the same moment- Our rising sign 
is their setting sigo, and our setting sign is their rising sign; 
so that a difference of longitude gives a difference of local 
time and consequently a difference of Lagoa. But sup¬ 
pose the* places to have the e&rae longitude. Take two 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



4 


jhtboductioit; 


places for instance on the same meridian and therefore 
due north and south of each other. Now the question is 
whether the Lagna is the same for both the places. No. The 
Lagua is a point iu the ecliptic which is inclined to the 
equator. The planes of the horizon of the two plaoes are 
different and they cut different parts of the ecliptic. It 
therefore follows that a difference of latitude gives a differ* 
ence in the Lagna. So that places with a difference of either 
longitude or latitude or with both cannot have the same 
Lagna at the same time. That Lagna or mere time or space, 
irrespective of the planets, has a great deal to do with shap¬ 
ing the fortunes of a native or Jatuki will be a new revela¬ 
tion to most people. We will come to this subject pre¬ 
sently. A horoscopio diagram or figure of the heavens 
represents both local time or Lagna and planetary positions. 

What then is Astrology or Horoscopy P What is its 
nature and what its bounds P Here is the author’s definition 
of horqsoopy. 

Ov N 

Horoscopy is stated to be the science of Ahoratri or the 
science of day and night—these beiug the broadest visible 
divisions of time—multiples of which give weeks, months, 
years, &o., and divisions of which give hours, minutes, 
seconds, Ac, The first letter A> and the last letterin', having 
been dropped, the term has assumed the shape of hora> and 
the author says that hora Shastra treats of the effects of the 
good and bad deeds of an individual in his previous birth $ 
so that the moment a pei*son is born, it becomes his l<»t to 
enjoy and snffer certain pleasures aud pains for his past 
good and bad deeds-*seeds oast into the cosmic region in 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



ISTBODUCnO*. & 

one birth begin to bear sweet and soar fruits in another 
birth according to their quality. 

In this connection we limy say a few words touching 
the long disputed question of fatalism versus free-will. Pel- 
sons of the former school hold that even the minutest eveuts 
of one^s life are pre-ordained, and that man is completely a 
puppet in the hauds of certain higher agencies* This error 
has evidently been the result of the observation of a number 
of well projected efforts in particular directions having 
been thoroughly discomfited. Again, men of the other school 
hold that man is a free agent, and that there is nothing 
impracticable for him if only proper means are employed for 
the purpose* This error agaiu has been the result of the 
observation of even ill projected efforts in particular direc¬ 
tions, proving highly successful—the failures, if any, being 
accounted for by the insufficiency of the means employed. 
In the one case man becomes an irresponsible agent) and 
in the other he not only booltessly grieves over his 
failures, but repeats his attempts, thus patting himself to 
trouble, expense and vexation only to fail again. Now, 
as regards the former position, it is held that man’s pre¬ 
sent deeds are all the effects of his previous deeds. As 
free agency of any sort is discarded from the question, 
it would follow that these previona deeds are the effects of 
deeds still more previous, and so on, ad infinitum, or till we 
are brought to a state of cosmic evolution when differences 
of states and conditions were infused into human souls by 
the Creator. Such 9 condition of irresponsibility is opposed 
to reason, opposed to progress, and equally opposed to divine 
and human law. It is a very pernioious doctrine in the 
extreme. 

As regards the latter view, if man oao wholly shape 
bis own fortunes, how are we to account for the phenomena 
of Buffering virtue and the enjoying vice in certain cases— 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



0 


IJTTBODUCTIOV, ' 

l 

for the former reaping no rewards and the latter esca^iog 
punishment. A satisfactory explanation would point to the 
former as being the efteots of previous karma , ami the latter 
as deeds for whioh man will both suffer, and enjoy in his next 
life. Taking entire human life into consideration, our owu 
opinion is that man is both a slave of the effects of his past 
deeds and is a free*-agenfc as regards fresh independent deeds 
deeds whioh are in no way directed to thwart, to arrest, to. 
alter or in any way to modify or remould the effects of his past 
karma . But if he wishes to move along with tlio current, he 
may do so, and the course will become more easy aud more 
smooth. This view will account for three things i (1), the many 
apparently unaccountable failures of attempts even when the 
means employed have been good; (2), the easy success 
that has attended many an effort when the means employed 
wore even weak ; (<’*), the success whioh in certain oases 
appears proportionate to labor. In the first cose, the attempt 
Was one ajmed at moving against the current of fate ; 
in the second case it was one of moving down with the 
current, and in the third case it was motion on still water, 
where and where alone free human agency can display 
itself. 

Having premised so much, we may now proceed a atop 
further and state that where the current is a weak one 
running with the course of a Leona, it might be opposed, 
and such opposition may be either direct or oblique accord¬ 
ing to the fitness and strength of the means employed, and 
that the task would become a difficult one, if the 
course to be resisted should flow with the course of 
a Tigris. The question is purely a question of 
karmio dynamics—reflects of past karma as opposed 
to present karma. To oppose even au opposible force» 
one must first possess a knowledge of its strength and 
direction of action, and seoandly* a knowledge of the propea 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



nttsoDtrcTioK. 


7 


meatis to be employed for the purpose, The former know* 
ledge is supplied to man by astrology* and the latter by 
snch works a9 fcbe K&t-mavipaka Gfr&ndhu. The means 
prescribed in the latte* consist of gifts, of Japa 
(psychic training or development) and certain fire cere¬ 
monies having an occult significance^ It follows whete the 
current is irresistible,the attempt to oppose it becomes ffttile* 
How can a person over hope to win success in a field when he 
is ignov&nt of the direction of attack as Well as the strength 
of his enemy. Astrology not only poiuts out to him his ene* 
mtes but his friends as well* whose help he might seek and 
obtain. By pointing out fields where there are friends and 
fields where there are foes* astrology indirectly points out 
to him neutr&l fields where man’s free agency has its full 
scope of action and where success is proportionate to labor. 

' The next important question for consideration is the 
examination of the connection* if any, between the planets 
and human fortunes ! where man suffers and enjoys the fruits 
of his past karmn, the question risked is what part t\usplanet$ 
play iu such human suffering and enjoyment. Here again 
believers in astrology ns a scieuce are divided into two* 
schools.The one admit active agency for the planets* and the 
other, denying it, state that the planets blindly and mechani¬ 
cally iudicate the current of human destinies. Iu support of 
the latter view, it is stated that if human suffering and 
enjoyment are directly traceable to man’s previous karma* 
then* to admit , active agency on the part of the planets* 
becomes not only superfluous, but inconsistent.: if a man 
loses his son, it is because* they say* he suffers for his 
karma, which might consist in his having caused n similar 
affliction to a somebody in his previous birth, and not 
because Mam occupied the 5th bouse from the ascendant 
or Lagoa at tbe moment of birth* and that therefore t.he 
planetary positions only indicate and do not bring about 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 


8 


INTRODUCTION* 


human suffering or enjoyment. These people from a human 
point of view cannot conceive the possibility of more causes 
than one for an event—each cause acting .independently 
and with full force. ^Hindu literature is full'of events, each 
of which is the immediate effect’ of a*number of causes* 
This peculiar combination of causes, quite* incomprehensi¬ 
ble to us, is a feature which distinguishes divine deeds from 
human deeds. We will quote an instance or^two. Ganga 
was cursed to pass through a^humau incarnation ; the 
Ashta (eight) Vnsus brought on themselves a similar 
curse—of the eight Vasns seven’wore allowed to return to 
Swarga immediately after birth ; Baja Sautanu goes out 
on a hunting excursion, marries Ganga, whom he finds on 
the banks of the Ganges, on condition of her being allowed 
to quit him the moment he opposes her own mode of dis- 
posing of the issue of their union. Eight children are bora 
in nil. The mother throws the first seven of them into the 
Ganges ; the king puts up with this for the love of the lady* 
He can bear no more inhuman work of the sort and so he 
resists ; Ganga quits her lord leaving the babe—the future 
.Blieeshma of the Muhabharat. Again, King Dasaratha goes 
out to hunt and enters a dense forest; hearing some gur^ 
gling sound in his neighbourhood, and mistaking it to be 
that of a wild elephant in the act of drinking water, the 
king discharges his arrow in its direction and kills a lad 
who was dipping liis bowl into the waters of a stream to 
carry it to his aged parents at some distance. The cries of 
t\ie dying lad brought home to the king his error, and the 
next moment the king himself proceeds to the lad’s father 
and entreats pardon. This - venerable old man expires on 
the spot pronouncing's curse on the king—rather reading 
the king’s fate that in his old age he shall die a similar 
death from grief on accouut of his son’s separation. In 
the meanwhile Yishuu himself draws on his own bead the 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


. 9 

curse of a human incarnation, attended with much goffering 
from separation from wife, from the sage Bhrigu, whose 
wife he killed when she refused to deliver up to his wrath 
an Asura who had r sought her protection. The Devas 
suffering much from Havana and his giant hosts proceed 
to Vishnu and .entreat relief. As Brahma had granted to 
Ravaoa the boon of exemption from death from all except 
from men and monkeys, and as Dasaratha had prayed td 
Vishnu for the blessing of a son, Vishnu enters on His 
human incarnation as Rama, the son of Dasaratha. From 
family dissensions he quits his kingdom and enters the 
forest of Dandaka with his bride. Grieved at his son’s 
separation, Dasaratha dies. Ravana carries away Seela and. 
Rama is grieved at her separation. He proceeds to Lanka, 
slays his enemy and recovers his wife. 

Most of the eminent astronomers of tke East and West 
believed in a double Sun, a double Moon, Mars and other 
planets—the one is the Sthula or the physical one, and the 
other is the Sukshma or the astral one. The difficulty in 
conceiving active agency as possessed by the planets when 1 
viewed in the light of huge inert balls, will be removed when 
we suppose that each planet possesses a soul. Besides, 
there is nothing repugnant to our mind^in the idea that the 
planets together form a body of executive officers charged 
with the duty of rewarding and puuishing humanity for 
their past karma by the command of the Most High, who 
at the same time allows each man the chance to ijnprove his 
own condition by making him a free agent in many 
matters. A man is whipped for theft by the order of the 
Magistrate. He suffers for his karma—the deed of theft. 
But the whipping officer is an active agent. Take another 
instance : A man does a piece of valuable service to the 
state ,* the sovereign commands a local officer to invest t^e 
person frith the order of kqighthood; the officer obeys ; 

'2 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 


JO 


INTRODUCTION. 


the officer no doubt is an active agent, though the honor 
was the immediate effect of tbe person’s services. We there- 
fore hold that planets not only indioate human destinies, but 
bring about such destinies. The world is a mixed field of 
honor, of punishment and of probation. And the planets are 
the rewarding and chastising officers, and meddle in no way 
when man exercises his free will within its own sphere. 

The same idea might be represented in another way : 
planetary activity is the total activity of a number of forces, 

some for good and some for evil, and while a man’s karma 

leads him into the one force or the other, there are other 
forees by a knowledge of whioh man may benefit himself, 
though it may not be his lot to be drawn into any of them 
by his past karma. If this were not the correct view of 
the part played by the planets, a large portion of the soience 
of astrology, in which man is advised to avail himself of suoh 
and such planetary positions for particular purposes, would 
become useless. Tbe planets therefore can be made to do 
more than the work of jailors and rewarding officers. For 
.instance, in the fourth chapter (Brihat Jataka) which treats 
of Nisheka (conception), a man is advised to avail himself of 
partionlar planetary positions if he desires an excellent issue: 

* Parasara, who was a great astronomer and astrologer, finding 
that suoh an hour fob Nisheka had approached, joined a boat¬ 
man's daughter in an island on the Jumna and the issue was 
the greut Vedavyasa. A Brahmin astrologer under similar 
oiroumstanoes joined a potter’s daughter, and the issue was 
the great Salivahana. 

That man is not altogether a free agent is an idea 
caught by Shakespeare in one of his well known passages 
in “ As You Like It.” 

“ All the world is a stage. 

And all the men and women merely players $ 

They have their exits and their entrances. 

And one man in his time plays many parts, 

His acts beiog seven ages . 11 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


11 


Again, while the heavens form the macrocosm, man is 
the microcosm. In other words, eaoh man is a little world 
exactly representing the Universe. While all seems quiet 
without, there is an active world within. Such a world is 
visible to the inner sight of a Yogi. Occult science treating 
of this subject says:— 

• • • 

If the Pranavayu (vital air) oan be taken to the Sushm- 
nanadi, eight sorts of music will be heard, and fire, lightning* 
stars, the moon and the sun will become visible. Again, in - 
Chapter IV, already referred to, Varaha Mihira .says that 
menstrual discharges oobUr in women when Mars and the 
Moon approach eaoh other. In connection with this sub* 
ject the author of Saratali says as' follows:— 

Wfiivfts H 

“ The Moon is water and Mars is fire; bile is the result 
of a mixture of fire and water, and when bile mixes with 
the blood, menses appear in womeh.” 

So that With (be change that is going on without, 
there is a 1 change going on within, and every element oi 1 bit 
of man’s physical body has its representative in the 


Digitized by t^,ooQle 



12 


INTRODUCTION. 


heavens* Such being the case, there is a subtle connec¬ 
tion, imperceptible because subtle, between the conditions 
of the planets and the stars above and those of man below* 

We shall now say a few words touching the causes of 
failure of astrological 'predictions: the most important of 
these we will take up first. 

Astrology rests on astronomy. The latter science was 
probably in a good condition at the time of Vikramarka. 
The tables for the calculation of the pl&oes of the planets 
which were then framed or then in use, were all suited to the 
time. Owing probably to the wear and tear of the several 
working parts of the whole machinery of the Solar system, 
the tables of one age are unsuited to another age. To this 
truth the ancient Hindu astronomers were keenly aliye. 
They have accordingly laid down this broad frule for the 
guidance of the future astronomers. 

Since error in calculation is as sinful as the murder of 
a Brahmin, the correct places of the planets shall be ascer¬ 
tained by daily meridian observations. 

And this cannot be done without an Observatory. Ob¬ 
servatories of some sort did exist in this land ; but owing 
to foreign invasions and the want of encouragement on the 
part of rulers, the science has ceased to progress, and the for¬ 
mer tables for want of corrections have become useless. The 
calendars therefore prepared by the native astrologers do 



Digitized by ^.ooQle 



INTRQDUCTION. 


13 


nob give the true plaoes of the planets. The error has been 
going on for the last 1000 years. 

The nantioal almanacs prepared in Europe and Ame¬ 
rica give very correct positions of the planets; and Messrs. 
Bapu DevftSastry of Benares, Lakshmana Chatrai of Poona, 
Baghunatha Ghariar of Madras, and Vencateswara Deekshi- 
tar and Sundareswara Srouty of Combaconum have started 
almanacs basing their calculation on the correct modern 
tables. These tables enable ns to ascertain correctly the 
places of the planets from the Vernal Equinox , one of the 
two points where the ecliptic cuts the equator. This point 
is the Western first point of Aries. It has a retrograde 
motion at the rate of about 50" a year. But the Hindu 
first point of Aries is the fixed star Bevati (the Yogatara 
of the group) which is stated to be on the ecliptic. This 
star is at present about 20° to the East of the Vernal Equi¬ 
nox. Planetary places from this star are known as the 
Nirayana Sphutam, and places from the Vernal Equinox are 
known as the Sayana Sphutam. The little bit of increas¬ 
ing space between the two points is known as Ayanamsa. 
Now B[indu astrology rests on the Nirayana Sphutam of 
the planets, and modern tables give us the correct Sayana 
Sphutam i so that if the length of the Ayanamsa is oorrectly 
known, it may be subtracted from the Sayana Sphutam, and 
the remainder will be the Nirayana Sphutam required. 
But the exact length of the Ayanamsa is not known, and it 
cannot be ascertained by direct observation, because the 
star Bevati has disappeared. I have treated of this subject 
at some length in the April (1883) issue of the Theosophist. 
The several almanac publishers already referred to have arbi¬ 
trarily assumed different lengths of tbe Ayanamsa, evidently 
to suit their own convenience. These lengths of the Aya¬ 
namsa on the 1st January 1883 are :— 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 


14 


INTRODUCTION. 


(1) Bombay 

Almanac 

(2) Madras 

(3) Combooonum 

j- do ... 

(4) Benares 

dp ... 

(5) Vakhya 

do ... 

(6) Siddhanta 

do ... 


Q 

r 

// 

18 

14 

20 

22 

2 

89 

21 

58 

29 

22 

41 

44 

20 

46 

15 


I have discovered the true length to range between 
20° 23' 8" and 20° 25' 22" on the 1st January 1883. By 
adopting the mean, namely, 20° 24' 15" the maximum 
amount of error will only be V 7". Now the difference 
between the correct Ayanamsa and the various Ayanamsaa 
above given will be seen from the following.'— 


(1) Bombay 

(2) Madras 

(3) Combnconum 

(4) Benares 

(5) Yakya 

(6) Siddhanta 


... — 2 9 65 

... + 1 38 24 

... +1 34 14 
... +2 17 29 
... + 0 22 0 


To express the same in other words. The Ayanamsa 
error as it affeots the planetary positions in point of time in 
the first four almanacs will be found to be as follows:— 


Planets. 

Bombay 

(before) 

Madras and 
Oombaoonnm 
(after) 

Benares 

(after) 

Bun. 

day. 

hour. 

\ 

day. 

boar. 

day. 

honr. 

2 

5 

i 

16 

i 

14 

Moon. 

0 

4 

0 

8 

0 

3 

Mars. 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

0 

Mercury . 

0 

13 

0 

10 

0 

9* 

Jupiter . 

26 

0 

19 

17 

18 

21 

Venus . 

1 

9 

1 

0 

0 

23 

Saturn . 

64 

16 

48 

23 

46 

20 

Moon's node... ... 

40 

21 

81 

0 

29 

16 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 









INTBODBOTIOlf. 


15 


• So (hat it is evident that horoscopes oonstruoted on 
the planetary positions as found in the existing almanacs 
are wrong. 

Again, in the construction of horoscopes, the following 
wrong table showing the Rasim ana or time of oblique ascen¬ 
sion of the Zodiaoal signs above the horizon is adopted nearly 
throughout the land by a great majority of ignorant astro¬ 
logers. 


Aries ... 

Ghatikaa. 

4i 

4 * 

Libra ... 

Gbatikas. 

6 

Taurus 

Scorpio 

H 

Gemini 

5l 

Sagittary 

5* 

Cancer 

6* 

Capricorn 

6i 

Leo 

51 

Aquarius 

4} 

. Virgo 

5 

Pisces 

4* 


The reader is referred to the Appendix for a correct 
table for all the places of India* 


A third cause of failure is an ignoranoe of the local 
time. The present days are days of olooks and watohes, 
and these are luxuries confined to our towns and do not 
extend to our villages. Besides, these olooks and watches 
are rarely made to show the local time. In most of the 
places of Southern India, the dock shows the Madras time, 
and where there are no clooks the time is ascertained by a 
rough calculation applied to the length of a man’s shadow. 
The corrections due to the latitude of the place and to the 
position of the sun on the^ecliptio are omitted. At night, 
if the sky should happen to be clear, the_transit of parti¬ 
cular constellations over the meridian is observed, and by 
the application of a rough table beginning with 

TfalTIT^TT. 

“ When Sravana crosses the meridian, Aries has risen 
by 2} Ghatikas,” an attempt is made to ascertain the local 
time. In the first place the table is a rough one, and in the 


Digitized by f^ooQle 







16 


INTRODUCTION. 


second place it applies to the time when the Yogatara or 
chief star of the group crosses the meridian/ The table there¬ 
fore becomes useless for times lying between the transit of 
the Yogatara of one group and that of the Yogatara of the 
next group. Besides, most men are ignorant not only of the 
Yogotara bub of the exact position of the meridian ; and turn¬ 
ing towards the star which might be to the east or west of 
the meridian y they fanoy* that it is just about to make the 
transit. If the night happens to be a cloudy one, the time 
is purely one of guess work. So many errors must of neces¬ 
sity lead often to an error in the Lagna ; and when this oc¬ 
curs, it upsets the whole thing. Add to this the errors of the 
calendar relating to the places of the planets. Cent, per cent, 
of the horoscopes of the present day are therefore wrong. It 
is a horoscope of this type that is put into the hands of a 
person who calls himself an astrologer. In a great number 
of cases? Indian astrologers are poor men who have betaken 
themselves to the study of the science as a means of liveli¬ 
hood. The public would pay them only if they would 
predict some good fortune ; if he correctly predicts an evil, 
he is not only not paid anything, but is set down for a 
soroeror, whom it would not be safe to approach. Thus the 
astrologer is induced to conceal any unpleasant truths which 
he might happen to know, and after this the complaint is 
that the predictions of such and such astrologers have 
failed ! For want of encouragement the astrologer pays little 
attention to the study of his subjeot and often has recourse 
to the help of the black art as already described. 

We shall now say a few words regarding a particular 
branch of the science known as Prasna or Arudha Shastra, 
horary astrology. This differs from horoscopy or nativities 
in this respect, viz., while the latter rests on the motions of 
the visible planets round the sun, the former rests mainly 
on the motions of certain invisible planets which are sup- 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



INTRODUCTION • 


>7 


posed to move round the horizon. Their laws of motion 
are exceedingly simple* These planets! which are 8 iu num¬ 
ber, move in the following order; The Sun, Mars, Jupiter, ' 
Mercury, Venus, Saturn, the Moon and B&hu, at the; distance 
of a sign and a half, or 45° from one another and take one 
full day or 24 hours to go round the horizon—the Sun being 
at the first point of Aries every day at sunrise, the horizon 
being their eoliptic and divided into 12 equal parts, each 
part being known as a sign, and Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and 
Aquarius being respectively the due eastern, southern, west¬ 
ern and northern signs. The remaining 8'signs occupy the 
four corners, two for each oorner, one on each side of the 
oorner point—Aries being situated to tho right of the north* 
eastern point, the order of the signB remaining the same as 
in the heavens above. The astrologer forms as it were the 
Sun, round whom the planets revolve. The direction . of 
(sign ocoupiedby), the querent is noted down as well as 
the position of the invisible planets at ,the , time. We 
cannot enter into the details of tho process of calculation 
here. Tho astrologer proceeds to discover the matter ques¬ 
tion and then makes his predictions with the help of his 
books. In this he is nssisted by another department of 
astrology known as Angavidya or Oheshta Sliastra which 
rests oil the motions of human limbs, Casual words and the 
like. Angavidya rests on the theory that an All-pervading * 
Intelligence is pointing out to the astrologer (who is 
otherwise unable to know it) the miuute events oflife in a; 
hundred ways. (Vide chapter 51 of Varaha Mihira’e Brihat 
Bamhita). * 

• Horoscopy differs from horary astrology in another, 
important point * while the former enables one to prodiot} 
even the distant events of life, the latter refers only to 
events of the immediate future, and while the one deals with 

3 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



18 


IHTRODUCTIOIC. 


events of considerable inportanoe, the latter deals mainly 
with events comparatively insignificant, such, for instance, 
as the sort of meal which one would take in the course 
of a day, the direction of his seat and the like* 
In such cases the astrologer generally'writes out his an¬ 
swers in a bit of paper and folds it up asking the questioner 
to^look into it after the event/for, the course of such minor 
events of life can be easily altere bdy a previous knowledge* 
These events of life are the immediate effects of aset of 
oircumstances in whioh a persou has just placed himself, 
the natural immediate effects of whioh form mutters for 
the consideration of horary astrology, and do not com© within 
the scope of horoscopy* • After a person has begun to apply 
his axe to a tree, it may not bo difficult to predict the direction 
of its fall, but not before. It would therefore be wrong to 
conclude from these minor predictions of horary astrology 
that tho minutest events of one’s life are preordained and 
that man has no control over them. 


It only remains to say a few words about certain books 
known as Nadigrandhams. These purport to contain a 
brief account of the lives of all mankind. It would appear 
on a superficial consideration of the subject that such books 
oannot at all exist. That they exist is a fact and the ques¬ 
tion therefore is how came they to exist—how were tjbey 
prepared. 

The planets occupy particular places on the ecliptic at 
particular points of time. Every moment their positions are 
changing. The question then is in what period of time 
the planets return to their former positions. This is a 
question of Arithmetic**^ question of the Least Common 
Multiple of 7 or 8 numbers. These numbers are the 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



INTRODUCTION • 


19 


siderial periods of Mercury, Venus, Earth 9 Mars, Jupiter 
and Saturn and of the Moon, via., 


Mercury 


87-9693 

days 

Venns 

... 

<224*7008 

>• 

Earth 

1 

MS 

865-2564 

V 

Mars 

• • • 

686-9795 

9* 

Jnpiter 

f99 

4882-5848 

» 

Saturn 

• • • 

10759-2200 

1 * 

Moon 


27 da. 7 hrs. 

45 in. 


Now the L. C. M. of the above numbers is the Kalp 
• of the Hindu Astrouomy is which 4320000000 siderial years. 
After which the planets all return to the first point of Aries 
at the horizon of Lanka—a place on the equator whose 
longitude is 760 E. from Greenwich. A Ealpa consists of 
1000 Ghataryngas. A Chaturyuga oon&sts of 4320000 
siderial years, of which Ealiynga consists oi 432000 siderial 
years. 

Dwapara ynga 432000 x 2 = 864000 years. 

• Treta yuga ... 432000 X 3 = 1296000 „ 

Erita yuga. ... 432000 X 4 = 1728000 » 

*A Ealpa forms Brahma’s day, at the end of which 

the Mkhitpralaya commences. Again, the number of 
Basi Chakrums of the Zodiacal representations of the 
positions of the planets is also limited. How ? Suppose 
there whs only one planet, say, the Sun. He might 
occupy any one of the 12 houses; so might Mars and 
each of the other planets. The 12 places of the Sun 
combined with the 12 plnoes of Mars will give us 12* or 
144 different places for the Sun and Mars. These combined 
with the 12 places of Jupiter will give 12 s X 12 or 12 s or 
1728 plaoes for the three planets, the Sun, M irs and Jupiter. 
Similarly 4 planets will give 12 4 positions and 5 planets 
will giro 12 s positions, and so on* Now horoscopy deals 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




20 


INTRODUCTIONS 


with the positions of the fiver planets Mercury,, Veuus^ 
Mars, Jupiter and Saturn, us well as the Sun v the Moon* 
and Baliu (Moon’s asceuding node). *Of these 8 planets,' all, 
excepting the inferior planets, Mercury and Venus, will 
give us 12 6 positions. Now the greatest elongation of 
Mercury from the Sun is about 19°, and that of Venus is 
about 47° ; so that when the Sun occupies a particular sign, 
Meroury will ocoupy either that sign or the sign next after 
it or, next .before it; similarly Venus will be either in the 
house occupied by the Sun or in one of the two signs next 
after it or next before it. In other words, the number 
already obtained will have to be increased threefold on 
accouut of Meroury and fivefold on account of Venus. The 
. number then is 12® X 3 X 5. Combine with this the 12 
Lagnas. The tojtal number of Basi Chakrams therefore 
is 12* xS x 5 X 12=12 7 X 15 = 537477120. So that while 
the limit of time is 432,0000000 siderial years, the 
limit of Basi Chakrams during that period is 537477120. 
These figures have beeu stated simply with the object of 
dispelling certain wrong notions that the number of 
horoscopic Basi Chakrams is infinite and that the changes 
go bn,for an infinite period of time. On the o^her hand*it 
would be wrong to suppose that the scope of a Nadigran- 
dham; extends to the period of a Kulpa or that it treats of 
so many.chakrams* The ,chakrams themselves cannot be 
so many in reality, the, number given above expresses the . 
possible number of positions in which the planets can be 
conceived to bo placed in the 12 signs of the Zodiac alge¬ 
braically, But thoy cannot assume all these positions, for. 
this simple reason, that they have motions of their own 
and oan only come to particular positions subject to supb 
motions. Again, of 537477120 horoscopic Basi Chakrams,, 

• Uranus, Neptune and other teleaoopio planets are not supposed to 
•zeroise any appreciable influence over human affairs. * , . 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


21: 


reduced, as just pointed out, a very large number refer to 
animals and plants* (ride Oh. 3 on AniraAl and Vegetable 
horoscopy). Again, it does not appear that the Nadi- 
grandhams treat of any period of time other than the p»*e»eut 
Kaliyuga^ aud it is probable that those liftman cbakrams 
that poioted to births in other yugAS have been rejected. 
Now a mumber of horoscopes, though agreeing iu the broad t 
Zodiacal divisions of the planetary places, might show great 
differences where the divisions are more minute ; as the 
N&vnmsa, Trimsamsa, Hora, Drekkann, Dvadasamsa and 
the like divisions, and it might be asked whether the Nadi* 
grnndhatns recognize these divisions, and if not, on what 
basis these graudhams are built. 

* The 360 degrees of the ecliptic are divided into 12 
equal parts of 30 degrees each, and each division is known as 
a sign of the Zodiac. Each sign; for purposes of Nadi- 
grandhams is divided into 150 parts known as amsas, and 
these amsas have particular qames assigned,to them, such 
as Vasudha,. Vyshnavi, Brahqii, Kola Euta, Ahi , SanJcart, h 
and so forth* A degree of the ecliptic contains 5 such parts* 
and eaoh part is divided into two halves known as 
Poorvabhaga and Uttarabhaga, t. 6., the first half and the 
second half. for. each half the Nadigraudham contains a 
life, and this half represents in space 6 minutes, and in time 
a Vighatika or 24 seconds. So that the mumber of horos¬ 
copes treated of iu Nadigrandhams as regards the amsas is 
3,600. ( Now the first volume of Dhrnvanadi gives a brief 
account of the lives of persons for the many a visas already 
referred to. The sketch is quite independent of the posi¬ 
tion of the planets and holds true with some slight alterations 
from planetary influences. The points treated of refer to 
the material points of one’s life. Now in theense of human 
horoscopy there it a law connecting the amsas with the * 
positions of > the planets. 1 Jong siispected that suoh a law ‘ 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



22 


INTRODUCTION. 


of connection roast exist. For otherwise it would not bo 
possible to describe correctly the positions of the planets 
several thousaud years hence and for such long ages. I 
examined the pages of the volume already referred to, and 
found the anthor writing in one place os follows 

“ We shall now proceed to state the method of dis¬ 
covering the places of the planets for the several amsaa for 
human births." A thrill of joy ran through me whioh 
wus soon followed by bitter disappointment For the next 
cadjun leaf whioh ought to have contained the 
information wanted was missing! Some person, evidently 
seeing the importance of the information, must have carried 
away the leaf of the book I examined. Our readers'are 
requested to examine other copies of the 1st volume of the 
Dhruvanadi. 

The author of a Nudigrandhnm takes up an arasam and 
jots down the positions or the several sets of positions of the 
planets, taking into consideration especially their Zodiacal 
divisions, and by slightly altering, or adding to, the brief 
sketch above referred to, for the amaas, finishes his account 
of a life. The author says that he treats only of about 30 
or 40 important points in o&ch life. Now under oue of 
these accounts a number of persons will fall whoso lives will 
■how differences of a more minute nature which the Nadi- 
grandham does not take into accouut. The Nadigrand- 
hams therefore ore only very brief sketches of human lives. 
A really learned astrologer can write out an account of a 
man’s life 10 or 20 times the length of the sketch in a 
Nadigrandham. 

This perhaps is the proper place for a few words regard¬ 
ing a common complaint on the part of persons who have 
consulted the Nadigrandhams, (hat these books are under a 
curse# that they correotly describe the post events of a 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


ss 


person’s life and err regarding the futnre events. The fault 
is not that of the Qrandham ; it certainly would not be pos¬ 
sible for the author to ascertain before-hand at whnt period 
of one's life the book would be consulted, and then to give a 
correct account of such life till that period of time, and then 
(for such an able astrologerj purposely to err. The fact is 
that, as already explained, the position of the planets as 
shewn in the horoscopes do not agree with any 
given in the Nadigrandhams. The possessor of a Nadi- 4 
graudhni examines a number of horoscopes in 
whioh the planetary positions very nearly approach 
those shewn by the horoscopes presented to him. The 
nearer the astrologer approaches the correct horoscope, 
the more numerous will be the points of agreement between 
the life suspected os the correct life and the actual life of 
the person. Now, if while the astrologer reads out from 
his book, the person oousulting it meets with any past 
events of his life not tallying with the statements of the 
book, the pages are set aside and other pages examined. But 
if no discrepancy is noticed, the person comes hastily to the 
conclusion that the life picked out is his and goes home 
satisfied, with a copy of it. Iu such oases, the ohances of 
disappointment are more numerous than those of success 
The best plan would be, for a person who wishes to con¬ 
sult the Nadigraudhams, to have his horoscope prepared 
with the help of the correct modern tables and the oorreot 
ayanamsa.* 

As regards the first astrological work taken up for 
translation, viz., the Brihat Jataka of Varaha Mihira, it is 

"Tills work oan be done at this office lor any person who would let 
ns know the time and plaoe of his birth for s fee of Bs. 3. fiat we can¬ 
not undertake to refer to any Hadigrandham as we have no tueh 
work with us. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



. 24 INTRODUCTION. 

. generally considered as one of the best works pn the soience* 
.The author himself says of it as follows : . , , . 

1 1 I 

fc For the benefit of those of broken attempts to oross 
the ocean of horoscopy, I construct this little boat consist¬ 
ing of a variety of metres* with a multiplicity of meanings*?’ 
Most of the stanzas are purposely intended to convey 
several meanings. Four commentaries have accordingly 
sprung up. The well known one is that of Bh&tta Utpala ; 
another is known as Subodbini > both of these are now 
.with me; a third commentary is known as. Mudraksuri, in 
which ic is said that most of the stanzas are interpreted 
arithmetically—the letters all standing for so many figures 
aud the figures representing the 27 a»terisms, the 12 signs, 
the 9 plauets, and so forth. The fourth commentary is 
known as Sreepateeyam. . 

• The author has written a smaller work on astrology 
known as Lughu Jafcaka. Hence the present work is styled 
the Briliat Jataka. 1 Jatakaor horoscopy is one of the three 
sections of Jyotis-Sastra ; and the aut hor has treated of all 
the three branches. The other two branches are Samhita 
and Astronomy. . Yaraha, Mihira’s work, on the former, 
known as th'o Brihat Samhita, is now being translated by 
me, aud his astronomical work is known as Panchasindhan- 
tika. It was long supposed to have been lost. Fortu¬ 
nately two copies of this rare work were recently disco¬ 
vered, and they were purchased by the Bombay Government. 
M. Thibaut, Phil. Dr. is now preparing an edition aud an 
English translation of the same, assisted by Pundit Suddha- 
kara. Yaruha Miliira has also written a work known as 
Yogayatra* A manuscript copy of this work is with Dr* 
Kerne, now in Ley don, Holland. . 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


25 


I have deemed it advisable to explain and retain tlib 
use of a number of Sanscrit terms for the convenience of tbe 
natives of this country, who must be n^ore familiar with 
them than with their English equivalents where such exist. 

It may be well to state here some of the subjects treated of 
in the work now taken up for translation. The book con¬ 
tains 28 chapters. The first two chapters relate to defini¬ 
tions of astrological terms and to elementary principles, 
The third relates to animal and vegetable horoscopy. The 
fourth treats of the determination! of tbe nature of issne—- 
their physical peculiarities, fortunes, Ac., from the planetary 
positions at the time of conception. A chapter is devoted to 
the determination of the description of the place of birth 
and the other incidents connected with the time of birth from 
planetary positions with a view to the correct ascertainment 
of the Lagna. The next ehapter treats of early death— 
Balarishta, and the next is devoted t 9 the determination of 
the length of life of a native—Jataki. A chapter is de¬ 
voted to the particular avocations of men and to their 
sources of wealth. Then follow several important chapters 
on Raja and other Yogas. The chapter on Pravrijya yoga de¬ 
termines under what planetary aspects a native will turn out 
an ascetic. The chapter headed Anisbtadbyaya contains a 
number of malevolent planetary positions, each connected 
with some evil of human life. A chapter is devoted to women* 
This is followed by a chapter which describes the particular 
manner in which a person meets with his death and the 
nature of his future life. In the next chapter the author lays 
down rules for the determination of the horoscope of a per¬ 
son ignorant of his time of birth. The above is not a 
complete list, and it would be wrong to jjjdge of the inter¬ 
esting nature of the contents of each chapter from the brief 
account given above. 

The appendix to the translation will contain numerous 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



INTRODUCTION. 


23 


tables and diagrams relating to the construction of horos¬ 
copes and to the ascertainment of the local time by the 
sun-dial> by the shadow and, at night, by the transit of 
the stars over the meridian. We will also state roles for 
the construction of the plane of meridian by means of fine 
threads for purposes of observation. The appendix will 
also contain a few tables, for the calculation of the lengths 
of the Dasas and Bhnkties. 

We may conclude this Introduction with ■ the" words of 
Zadkiel and “ advise those who value truth to spend a few 
days in examining the principles laid down in this work 
and applying them to their own individual cases before 
they join the herd of the learned and the unlearned in 
pledging their words to a false assertion, viz., that Astrology 
is an unfounded science. ” 

N. C. 

Madura, 2nd June 1885. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



I 

The following list of Astrological terms defined in 
the first two chapters and arranged alphabetically with 
the stanzas given opposite 'to each is published for con¬ 
venience of reference. 

4 Ch. Stanza* ‘ 

, A. 

Agjna (10th bouse) . I 10 

Akokera (Greek name for Maknra, Capricorn). I 8 

Ambu (4th house) . I 18 

Angles or quadrants, their strength. I 19 

Antyabba (Sign Meenn, Pisces). ... I 8- 

Apoklima (the 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12 houses 

from the ascendant) . ... I 18 

Aspects, planetary, . ... II 13. 

Astabharana (7th house or setting sign) ... I 18 

Atimitragraho, very friendly planets.II 19 

Atisatrugraha, very inimical planets.II 19 

B. 

Benefic planets ... ... ... .II. 5 

Benefio signs . Ml ess ’ I 11 

Biped signs, their strength. I 19 

0 . 


Castes, planetary divisions of.. 

... II 

7 

Centiped signs, their strength. 

... I 

19 

Chara rasi, movable signs ... 

... I 

11 

Chaturasra, 4th and 8th bouses ... 

... I 

16 

Chatushpada rasi, quadruped signs ... 

... I 

19 

Cheshtabala, motional strength of planets 

... II 

19 

Clothes, planetary divisions of. 

... 11 

12 

Colors, planetary divisions of. 

... II 

4 & 5 

Colors, of Zodiacal signs . 

... I 

20 

Common signs ... ... . 

... I 

11 

D. 



Dakshina rasis,' Southern signs 

... I 

11 

Depression signs and degrees. 

... 1 

13 

Devas, planetary divisions of. 

... II 

6 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



ASTROLOGICAL TERMS. 


Gh. Stanza. 


Dhalus or elements of the body, planetary 

divisions of... 

Dik bain, quarterly strength of planets 
Dik, direction of planets 
Directions of planets ... ... 

Diurnal signs ... 

Drekkanas. their lords... ... . 

Drishti, planetary sight or aspect .— 

Dnschikya, 3rd house. . 

Dwadasabhava, signification of the 12 houses., 
Dwadnsamsa, division of a sigu into 12 
parts ... ... ... ... •* 

Dwelling . houses, planetary divisions of 
parts of ... ... ... ... 

Dwipada rasis, biped signs ... 

Dyuna, 7th house . ... 


II 

II 

II 

II 

I 

I 

II 

I 

I 


II 

I 

I 


11 

19 

& 

5 
10 

11 & 12 
13 
19 

15& 16 

6 

12 

19 

16 


E. 


Eastern signs ' ... ... 

Elements, dhatus, of the body, planetary 
divisions of ... ' ••• , ••• 

Elements, planetary divisions of. ... 
Exaltation 6igns and degrees. 

F. 

Female planets ... 

Female signs ... ... . 

Fixed signs ... ... . 

.Flavor, planetary 

‘Foot, signs that rise with their. 

Forms of the signs . 

Forms of the planets. ... ' ... 

Friendly planets. ... ... ... 

G ■ 

* 

Garments, planetery divisions of 
Greek names for Zodiacal signs. ... 
Guna, temper, planetary divisions of... 


II 

II 

I 


II 

I 

I 

II 
I 
I 

II 
II 


u 

It 

6 

13 


6 

11 

11 

14 

10 

5 

8 to It 
15 to 18 


II 

I 

II 


12 

8 

7 


Digitized by 


Google 





ASTROLOGICAL TERMS. 


'iii 


H. 


Ch. Stanza. 


Heads, signs that rise with their . I 10 

Head and tail, sign that rises with its ... I 10 
Hermaphrodite planets... ... «... • ... II 6. 

Hibukrt, 4fch house ... ... ... ..; I IB 

Hora .* I 9 

Horas, their lords .. ... I 11&12 

Houses* their lovds . I ft 

Hridroga. .Greek name for Kumbha, Aquarius. I 8 


Immovable signs . ... 

... I 

11 

Inimical planets . 

T 

... II 

16 to 18 

u • 

Jamitra, 7th honse 

... I 

18 

Jati, Caste, of the planets 

... lr 

7 

Jituma, Qreek name for Mithuna, Gemini 

... I 

8 

Juka, Greek name for Tala, Libra ... 

... I 

8 


K. 


Kala, time, planetary lengths of .II 14 

Kala bala, periodical strength of planets ... II 19 

Kala purusha, planetary divisions of ... II 1 

Kala purusha, Zodiacal division of . I 4 

Karmasthanam 10th honse ... ... ... I 18 

Kendra, quadrants or angles, their strength I 17 & 19 
Kourpya, Greek name for Vrischika, Scorpio. I 8 

Kria, Greek name for Mesha, Aries. I 8 

Kulira, Kataka, Cancer. 18 


L ; 


Lagoa, strength of ... ... .. I 18 

Leya, Greek name for Simha, Leo ... I 8 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




ASTROLOGICAL TKRVS. • 


ft 

M. Ch. Stanza* 

Malo'planets.II 6 

Male signs ••• • • • • . • ••• I II 

Malefic planets. •••• II 5 

Malefic signs .... I 11 

Measurement of the Zodiacal signs ... * ... I 19 

Meshoorana, 10th house . I IB 

Metals, planetary divisions of ... ... ... II 12 

Mitragraha, friendly planets.II 15 to 18 

Moola trikona, signs and their lords. I 14 

Motional strength of planets .II 19 

Movable signs ... ... ... ••• ... I 11 

Movable and immovable signs ... I 11 


N. 


Naisargikabala, natural, relative strength 
of planets ... ... ... ... ••• 

ii 

21 

Names, various, for planets . 

ii 

2 & 3 

Napumsaka graha, hermaphrodite planets ... 

ii 

6 

Natural, relative, strength of planets 

ii 

19 

Navamsa, division of sign into 9 parts and 
their lords ... ... ... . 

i 

6 

Neecha, depression signs . 

i 

13 

Neutral planets ... ... ... ... 

u 

17 & 18 

Nocturnal signs . 

i 

10 


P. 


Panaphara signs, 2nd, 5th, £th & 11th houses. P 18 

Papagraha, malefic planets .II 5 

Paparasi, malefic signs . I 11 

Paschima rasi, Western signs . I 11 

Pathona, Greek name for Kannya, Virgo ... I 8 

Periodical strength of the planets .II 19 

Political divisions of the planets .II 1 

Positional strength of the planets .II 19 

Prak rasis, Eastern signs . I 11 

Prishtodayarasis, signs rising with their feet. I 10 

Pnrusha graha, male planets. ... II 6 

Purusha rasis, male signs. ... ... ... I 11 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




ASTROLOGICAL TERMS* 




Q. Ch« Stanza. 

Quadranls, their strength • ... ... ... I 17&19 

Quadruped signs, their 8 rength . 1 19 • 

Quarterly strength of planets ... .. II 19 


B. 


Basis. Signs, names of . 

Basis, their lords . 

KikBhasandhi, defined. 

Bitas, planetary divisioi ft of ... 

Kupa, shapes, of planets 

Bupa, shapes, of signs.• ••• 

S. 


... I 4 

... I 6 

...I 7 

... II 12 

... II 8 to 11 
I 5 


S&magraha, neutral planets.•• •*. II 16,17 

Satru graha, inimical planets.II 15 to IS 

Seasons, planetary divisions of ••• ... II 12 

Shadvarga, 6 modes of the division of the 

ecliptto ... ... ... ... ••• I *9 

Shapes of the signs ... . ... I 5" 

Shapes of the planets.II 8 to 11 

Sights or aspects ef the planets ... II 13 

# Signs, names of ... ... ... I 4 

* Signs, their lords . . I 6 

Significations, of t the 12 Bigns of Zodiac ... I 15 & 16 
Siraprishtodaya rasi, sign that rises with its 

head and tail ••• ... ... ••• I 10 

Sirodaya rasis, signs that rise with their 

heads •«. ... ... ... ... I 10 

Southern signs ... ... ... ... ... I 11 

Sthanabala, positional strength of planets ... II 19 

Sthira rasis, fixed Bigns ... ... ..I H 

Streegraha, female planets2. ... II 0 

Stree rasis, female signs . I ll ' 

Strength of Lagna . 1 3 9 

Subhagraha, benefio planets.II 5 

Sukha, 4th house .... I l 8 

' Sutabha, 5th house . I 18 

Swakshetra houses and their lords . I 0 


Digitized by 


Google 





ASTROLOGICAL TIRKS. 


T1 

T. Ch. StauE. 

Tails, signs tlmt rise with their . I 10 

'Tnpas, 9th house ... ... ... ... I 19 

Tavuri, Greek name for Yrishabha, Taurus ... ■ I 8 

Temper, of planets .II 7. 

Touksbika, Greek name for Dhanus, Sugittari. I 8 

Triangular signs ... . I 6 

Trikona, 5th house . I 18 

Trikona rasi, triangular signs. ... I 6 

Trimsamsa, division of sign into SO parts ... I 7 

Tritrikona, 9th house ... ... .. ... I 19 

U. 

TJbhaya rasi, movable and immovable signs... I 11 

Ucoharosi, signs of exaltation with degrees ... I 13 

Upachaya or improving signs . I ]5 

Uttara rasi, Northern signs ... I 11 

V. * ’ 

Vargottama, defined ... ... ... ... I 14 

Yarua, color of planets . »s* It 4 & 5 

Varna, color of Zodiacal signs I 20 

Vesi, 2nd house from the Sun. . I 20 

Yesma, 4th house . 1 18 

W. 

Western signs. ... I 11 

. t 

% 


I 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 





THE 

BRIH T J TAKA 

Of 

Varaha Mihira. 

CHAPTER I. 

Definitions and Elementary Principled 
(Zodiacal.) 

1. May the Sun give us speech, who hy his light 
illumines the Moon,(a) who is the path of those who have 
no rebirth, who is the Atma of those who know the Atma, 
who is the Deva worshipped in sacrificial rites, who is the 
Lord of the Devas and of the Lights of the sky, Who is 
the Author of the origin, growth and annihilation of the 
worlds, who is sung in the Vedas in various ways, who is 
possessed of many rays and who forms the Lamp of the 
three worlds* 

NOTE8. 

(a) In conneotion with this we would draw the atten¬ 
tion of the reader to what the author says on the subject 
of the Moon receiving light from the Sun in Stanza 2 of 
Chapter IV of his Brihat* Samhita, which runs as follows ; 

"The rays of the Sun falling on the watery Moon re¬ 
move the darkness of the night (on Earth) just in the same 
way as light reflected from a mirror (placed in the Sun) re¬ 
moves the darkness (from) within a roOm.” 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



2 BBIHAT JATAKA. [ch. I. 

And in the Vedas we find the (risible) Moon briefly 
defined as follows: 

u Surya rasmischandramah.” 

The Moon is the rays of the San. 


2. Thongh various well written works on Astrology(a) 
the productions of able men—exist for the enlighten¬ 
ment of intelligent Btndents (of horoBoopy), I begin 
to construct (this) small boat (consisting) of stanzas 
(written) in various metres and of several meanings for 
(the benefit of) persons of broken attempts to cross the 
vast ocean of horoscopy. 

NOTES. 

(a) Bach works as those of Parasara, Garga, Badara- 
yana, Satyacharya and others. 


3. According to some, the word hora is a corruption 
of the word Ahoratri, the first and last letters (syllables) 
being dropped. The soience (of horoscopy) treats of the 
effects of the good and bad deeds (karma) of men in their 
previous births. 


4. The (twelve) signs of the Zodiac, commencing with 
the first point of Aries and of (the asterism of) Aswani, 
and consisting, each, of nine stellar quarters and forming 
a circle, are respectively the head, face, breast, heart, belly, 
nave), abdomen, genital organ, two thighs, two knees, 
.two ankles and the two feet of Kalapuruslia. (The terms) 
Basi, Kshetra, Graha, Biksha, Bham, Bhavana, are synony¬ 
mous terms. 


Digitized by t^,ooQle 



tJH. I.] 


3BBIHAT JATAKA. 


The following 
reference:— 


NOTES. 

taljle will he useful for purposes of ready 


R(l8i. 

Sign. ■ 

. Part of body . 

Mesha 

... Aries 

... Head 

Vrishabha 

... Taurus 

... Pace 

Mitbuna 

... Gemini 

... Breast 

Xataka 

... Canoer ' 

... Heart 

Simha 

•.. Leo 

... Belly 

Kanya 

... Virgo 

... Navel 

Tula 

... Libra 

... Abdomen 

Yrischika 

... Scorpio 

... Genital organ 

Dhanus 

... Sagittari 

... Two thighs 

Makara 

... Capricorn 

... Two knees 

Kumbha 

... Aquarius 

...Two ankles 

Meena 

... Pisces 

... Two feet 


The twenty-seven asterisms are :— 


'\eAr*^' Aswini 
'Bharani 
s^54-Kritfeika 
7i4*v**Rohini 
%***•* Mrigasirsha 
\i\aft **-Ardra 
f ) — Pnnnrvasu 
j^e^O'r-PuBhyft 
v >//#/"* Asblesha 

U. Phalguni 
^e^nfT-Hasfca 
filii/t'A Ohitra 
‘£0i*at^Swati 
oflSrA— Visskha 
% UM ~ Anuradba 
>A^r Jyeshta 
•** Mala 

Ashadha - 
Aghadha 
£ Sravsna 
8ravishta 
Staabhishak 
P. JBhadrapnda 
v,a*ivi*TJ. Bhodrapada 
/l^^-Bevafci 


... p Arietta 

... 35 Arietis, and Mnsca 

... 7 Tauri, Alcyone 

... a Tauri, Aldebaran 

... A Orioois 

... a Orionis 

... 6 Gemini Pollux 

... o Oancri 

... 8 Hydrae 

... a Leonis, Begulas 

... 9 Leonis 

... P Leonis 

... 9 Oorvi 

... « VirginisSpica 

... a Bootis, Arotnrus # , 

... • Librae 

... 9 Scorpion!* 

ft* a Scorpionis, Ar it ares 

... A Scorpionis 

... 9 Sagittarii 

M# q Sagittarii 

... a Aquilae, Atair 

... P Delpbini 

... A Aquarii 

... cr PegaM 

... y P gasi and Andremedae 
5 Pisoium 


These asterisms or lunar mansions are divided each 
into four equal parts known as Nakshatrapadas. There 


Digitized by 


Google 



4 


BRIHAT JATAKA# 


OH. li 


are therefore 108 each parts in the ecliptic, and each sign 
contains nine such parts or 2J stellar divisions The first 
asterism, Aswini, commences at the first point-of Aries, 
which is the star Bevati, about 20° to the eaBt of the 
Vernal (Equinox—(Vide Introduction), so that the second 
quarter of the asterism of Krittika commences the first 
point of Taurus. The third quarter of the asterism of 
Hrigasirsha commences the first point of Qemini, and the 
fourth quarter of the asterism of Funarvasu commences 
the first point of Oancer, and so on. 

Eaoh of the terms Basi, Kshetra, Qraha, &o., means a 
sign of the Zodiac, whioh is a twelfth part of the heavens 
or 30° of the ecliptic. 


6. Sign Pisces is of the shape of(a) two fish ; sign 
Aquarius is of the shape of a man with a. (water) pot ; 
sign Gemini is of the shape of a man and woman, (the 
former) with a stick and (the latter) with a lyre, both seat¬ 
ed in one seat; sign Sagifctari is of the shape of a man 
who in his lower parts is a horse j sign Capricorn is of 
the shape of a crocodile with the face of a deer ; sign 
Libra is of the shape of a person with .scales (in his hand); 
and (sign Virgo is of the shape of) a virgin ia a boat with 
crops (in one hand) and a light (in the other). The other 
signs resemble in shape(2>) the different creatures denot- 
ted by their names. The dwelling plaoes of the several 
signs are places appropriate to the several creatures. 

■ , ; NOTES. 

(а) Sign Pisces is of the shape of two fish lying side 
by side, the head of the one being near the tail of the 
other. 

(б) That is, Aries (Mesha) is of the shape of a ram: 
Taurus (Vrishabba), of the shape of a bull } Cancer (Kata-. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



OH. I.] BRIHAT JATAKA* 5 

ka), of the shape of a. crab : Leo (Simlia), of the shape of a* 
lion; and Scorpio (Vrischika), of the shape of a scorpion. 

This stanza as well as stanza 4 are chiefly useful in 
questions 6onneoted with horary astrology—in the disco¬ 
very of stolen property and the like. 


6. Mars, Venus, Mercury, the Moon, the Sun, Mer¬ 
cury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Saturn, Saturn and Jupiter are 
respectively the lords of the Signs, and of the Navamsas 
and Dwadasamsas ; and the several signs (of the Zodiac 
beginning from Aries) commence respectively with the 
Navamsas of Mesha, Makara, Tula and Kataka. 

' NOTES. 


Six modes oi division of ike ecliptic (860o) for borosoopio purposes 
known as the Shadvarga are mentioned (vide stanza 9). These are Basi 
(sign) in whioh the ecliptio is divided into 12 equal parts of 30° each; 
(vide stanzA 4). Hora in whioh each sign is divided into two eqaal parts of 
15° each ^vide stanzas 9 and 11). Drekkana in which a sign is divided 
into three eqaal parts of 10 b each (vide stanzas 11 and 12); Navamsa 
in whioh a sign is divided into nine equal parts of 3o 20* each; Dwada- 
samsa, in whioh a sign is divided into twelve equal parts of 2o 3 CP eaoli; 
and Trimsamea, in whioh a sign is divided into thirty equal parts of a 
degree eaoh (vide stanza 7). The Navamsas t each sign being divided 
into 9 equal parts and there being 12 juoh signs, there are in all 12X9 
or 108 snob divisions in the eoliptio. We have already (vide stanza 4) 
seen that the ecliptio contain 27x4 or 103 stellar quarters or N&k- 
shatrapadhs ; it follows therefore that a Navamsa is a Naksliatrap&da, 
that is one-fourth of a lunar mansion. The .108 Navamsas beginning 
from the first point of Aries bear the same names os the twelve signs 
of the Zodiao counted over and over again : the first Navamsa of Mesha 
is Mesha itself; that of Vrisbabha is Makara ; that of Mithnna is Tula; 
and that of Kataka is Kataka itself. The same order holds for the 4 


signs from Simha to Vrischika and for the 4 from Dhaous to Meena. 
In other words the four sets of Trikona or triangular signs begin with 
the same Navamsas t that is the Trikona signs of ^ 

/ Mesljj, SimhajD hJhus begin with the Navamsa of Mesha. ^ 
Vrishabha, KanSfya, Makara begin with the Navamsa of Makara. 
CUrtf . MjtiXna, KtuftSia begin with the Navamsa of ^fifta; and 

Vflifr+i Kwki, Vrisomka, Mdfea begin with the Nawansa of K$&ika. 

The Dwadasamsas : The twelve parts into whioh eaoh sign is divided 
bear the same names as those of tho signs of the Zodiao. The name of the 
first Dwadasamsa of a particular sign is the name of tbo sign itself. So 
that the 12 Dwadasamsas of Mesba are Mesha, Vrishabha, Mithunn, Ac., 


ending with Meena. Those of Vrishabha are Vrishabha, Mithuna, Kataka, 
Ac., ending with Mesha. Those of Mithuna are Mithuua, Kataka, Simha, 
Ac., ending with Vrishabha and sotm. ~ 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



c 


BRIHAT J AT AKA. 


--[CH. I. 

i °? fche ^ avamBas Dwadasameas are the nme as the 

lords of the Basis (signs). These are mentioned in the text in the order 
of the signs. It will be found that the San and Moon have each a house. 

"a t £ e t°x fcher e nets hftve each two bo™**' These hoasesare known 
as Swoksbetras j Thas 


Mars is the lord of Mesha and Vrisohika. 

Yenns is the lord of Vrishabha and Tala. v 

Mercury is the lord of Mithuna and Kannya. 

Jupiter is the lord of Meena and Dhanus. 

Saturn is the lord of Kumbha and Makara. 

The Moon is the lord of Kataka, and the Sun is the lord of Simha. 

There are sevoral modes of oonstruoting a figure of the heavens. The 
one used in Southern India is the one recommended by Jaimuni—-the 
author of Astrological Ahporisms. It is given below, and the reader 
is referred to the appendix for diagrams relating to the several modes of 
division of the eoliptio referred to above. 


Meena, Jupiter. 

Mesha, Mars. 

.Vrishabha 

Venus. 

Mithuna 

Mercury. 

Kumbha, Saturn 

BASI OHAKBA. 

Kataka, Moon. 

Makara, Saturn. 

Simha, Sun. 

Dhauns, Jupiter. 

Vrisohika, 

Mars. 

Tula, Venus. 

Kanya, 

Mercury. 


7, Five, five, eight, seven and five parts (degrees) 
are respectively those of Mars, Saturn, Jupiter, Mercury, 
and Venus, in the odd signs. In the even signs their 
'\f order is reversed. The ends (last Navamsas) of Kataka, 
' Vrisohika and Meena are known as Riksha sandhis. 

/ A 

jj IfOTBS. 

This stanza defines Trimsamsas, and their lords* Ab 
already observed Trimsamsais division of each sign into 
thirty equal parts, each part being a degree. The odd 
signs are Mesha, Mithuna, Simha, Tuli, Dhanus and Kum¬ 
bha, The even signs are Vrishabha, Kataka, Kannya, 
Vrisohika, Makara and Meena. ^ ^ 

Itrfr Y3 1 ^ 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




BR1HAT JATAKA. 


S 


IX 

2.0 

i~S 

30 


CH. !•] 


7 

t'vtV- 


In the odd signs the first five degrees are the Trim* 
samns of Mars ; the next fire are those of Saturn; the next 
eight are those of Japiter; the next seven are those of 
Mercury; and the last five are those of Venus. In the 
even sigos the first five are those of Venus; the next seven 
are those of Mercury; the next eight are those of Jupiter; 
the next five are those of Saturn ; and the last five are 
those of Mars. The Trimsamsa division is used by the 
author in his Chapter relating to the horoscopy of women. 


%- 

* 

¥ 


8. The terms Kriya,' Tavuri, Jituma,' Kulira, Leya, 
Pathona, Juka, Koarpi, Toukshika, Akokera, Hridroga and 
Antyabha (are other names for the signs of the Zodiac). 

NOTES. 

All the above names, excepting Kulira and Antyabha 
are evidently Greek terms—a circumstance clearly indica¬ 
ting that the intercourse between the learned men of India 
and Hellan was more than superficial. 


9. A planet is said to be in its Varga if it be in its 
Lrekana, Hora, Navamsa, Trimsamsa, Dwadasamsa and 
Kshetra. The term Hora means both the, rising sign and 
one half of a sign oE the Zodiac. 

NOTES. 

These terms have already been explained (vide stanza 

6). 

The term Kshetra means a house or a sign. For the 
Namefc and Lords of the Hora divisions of a sign vide 
Stanza 11. 

10. The signs Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Sagittari 
and Capricorn are known as the night signs ;(a) and, with 
the exception of Gemini, they rise with their feet(6)* The 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



8 


BR1HAT JATAXA. 


[CH. I. 


other signs rise with their heads(c) and are powerful by 
day(d). The two fish rise by both (head and foot)(e). 

NOTES. 

(a) Therefore the day signs are Leo, Virgo, Libra, 
Scorpio, Aquarius and Pisces. 

(b) Signs that rise by their feet are known as Prish- 
todaya Rasis and these are Aries, Taurus, Cancer, Sagittarii 
and Caprioorn. . 

(c) Signs that rise by their heads are known as Siro- 
daya Basis, and these are Gemini, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scor¬ 
pio and Aquarius. 

(d) Therefore the Prishtodaya signs are powerful at 
night. 

(e) For the shape of the sign Pisces vide Stanza 5. 


11. The signs (from Aries) are (by turns) malefic and 
benefic, masculine and fominine (a) and movable, fixed and 
both (movable and fixed)(6). The signs Ajies, Taurus, 
Gemini and Cancer with their triangular signs denote each 
respectively the East, South, West and North(c). The 
two horas of the odd signs are respectively the Solar 
and Lunar horas, and the two of the even signs are 
reapectiviy the Lnnar and Solar horas. The lords of the 
Drekkanas,(d)(of a particular sign) are respectively the lords 
of that sign, the 5th sign and the 9th sign* 

NOTES. 

. (a) In. other words the odd signs are all malefic and 
masculine, and the even signs are all benefic and feminine. 

(5) Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn are movable 
signs. 

Taurus, Leo, Scorpio anh Aquairus are fixed signs. 

] Gemini, Virgo, Sagittari and Pisces are both (movable 
and fi?ed) and are also known as common signs* 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. I.] BRIHAT J AT All. 0 

(c) The signs Aries, Leo and Sagittari aro'known as 
the Eastern signs, 

Tara8, Virgo and Capricorn are Southern signs. 

Gemini, Libra and Aquarius are Western signs. 

Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces are Northern signs/ , 

(d) For example: The lords of the three Drekk&n&s 
of Leo are respectively the Sun (lord of Leo), Jupiter 
(lord of Sagittari the nth bouse) and Mars (lord of Aries 
the 9th house). 

/ 

12. According to sorne(a) the lords of the two horns 
of a sign are respectively the lords of the sign and of the 
llthsign((); and the lords of the three Drekkanas of a 
sign are respectively the lords of the sign, tho 12th sign 
and the 11th sign(c)'from it. 

NOTES. 

(а) That is, according to Garga and men of his 
school. Bat the author^ opinion is that expressed in 
stanza 11 in which he is supported by the opinion of Satya- 
eharya. 

(б) The lords of the two horas of Sagittari, for in¬ 
stance, are respectively Jupiter (lord of Sagittari) and Ve¬ 
nus (the lord of Libra the 11th house 

(c) The lords of the three Drekkanos of Sagittari, for 
instance, are respectively Jupiter (lord of sagittari), Mars 
(lord of Scorpio the 12th house) and Veuus (lord of Libra 
the llth house). , 

13. The Signs Aries, Taurus, Capricorn, Virgo, 
Cancir, Pisces and Libra are respectively tho Ubolia 
(exaltation) signs of tho Sun and other planets. The 
10th, 3rd, 28th, l*5th, 5fcb, 27th, and 20th are the degrees 
of maiu exaltation of the several planets. The 7th or • 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



10 


BRIHAT JATAKA* 


[CH. I. 

opposite signs are the Neecha (depression) signs ; and the 
degrees of main depression are the same as given above. 

NOTES. 

A planet in his exaltation sign is considered as exoee- 
dingly powerful and one in his depression sign as excee¬ 
dingly weak. The Sun and Moon are also treated as pla¬ 
nets* The Hindu Astrological order of the planets is the 
same as the days of the week. The following table is 
given for convenience of reference. 


Planets * Uceha or Exal¬ 

Neecha or de¬ 

Degree of main 

tation Signs . 

pression -Sign 8. 

Exaltation or 
Depression. 

Sun. Aries. 

Libra. 

10 

Moon. Taurus* 

Scorpio. 

8 

Mars. Caprioorn. 

Cancer. 

28 

Mercury. Virgo- 

Pisces* 

• 15 

Jupiter. Cancer. 

Capricorn. 

5 

Venus. Pisces. 

Virgo. 

27 

Saturn* Libra, 

Aries. 

20 


14. In the movable and other signs (a) , the first, the 
central and the last Navamsas are known as Vargottama 
positions. Planets in such positions will prodace good 
effects. The signs Leo, Taurus, Aries, Virgo, Sagittari* 
Libra, and Aquarius are known as the Moolatrikona bouses 
of the planets respectively.^) 

NOTES. 

(a) The Vargottama places are : The first Navamsas 
of the 4 movable signs Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Capri¬ 
corn. 

eTh 5th Navamsas of the ; four fixed signs, Taurus, Leo, 
Scorpio and Aquarius. 

The 9th Navamsas of the four movable and fixed signs 
pemini, Virgo, Ssgittari aud Pisces. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBIBAT JATAKA. 


11 


CH. I.] 

These Navamsas will be found to bear the same names 
os the signs themselves. For example: the first Navamsa 
of Aries is Aries; the first of Cancer is Cancer, and so 
forth. 

The fifth Navamsa of Taurus is Taurus ; of Leo is Leo 
and so fovth. 

The ninth Navamsa of Qemini is Gemini, of Virgo is 
Virgo, and so forth. 

(b) The following list contains the Moola Trikona, 


signs of the planets : 

Planet*. 

Moola Trikona signs . 

Sun. 

Leo. 

Moon.. 

Taurus, : 

Mars. 

Aries. 

Mercury. 

Virgo. 

Jnpiter. . 

Sagittarir 

Venus, 

Libra. 

Saturn. 

Aquarius. «’ 


15. The significations of the 12 houses from the rising 
Bign (nsoendant) are respectively (a native’s) body, family, 
brothers, relations, sons, enemies, wife, death, deed of 
virtue, avocation, gain and loss (a). The 8rd, 6th, 10th' 
and 11th bouses from the ascendant are known as the 
Upachaya (improving) Bigns, but not so according to 
some.(b) 

NOTES. 

(a) The following is a list of significations of the seve¬ 
ral houses of the Zodiac from the asoendant. 

Asoendantor , 

1st house....Body, fame, limbs. 

2nd „ ...Family, wealth, eyes, speech truthfulness. 

3rd „ ...Brothers, bravery, meals: 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



12 BRIHAT JATAKA. [CH. 1, 

.. . , I 

4tli „ ...Relations, education, mother, cows, dwel¬ 
ling plaoe, carriage) comfort, 

5th „ '...Sons, intelligence, previous karma. 

Oth „ Enemies, kinsmen, diseases. 

7th „ ...Wife, generosity, respect. 

8th „ ... Death, duration of life. 

9th „ ...Deeds of virtue, father, medicine. 

L 10th „ ...Avocation, knowledge, clothes. 

Hth „ ...Gain, earning. 

12th ,; ...Loss, bad deeds, travels. 

(&) Garga and astrologers of his school are.of opinion 
that the 3rd. Oth, 10th and 11th houses cease to be Upa- 
chaya places if malefic planets or planets which are un¬ 
friendly to the lords of these 4 houses should either occupy 
such houses or aspect the same. But the author does not 
agree with Garga and be is supported in his views by 
Satyacharya and by Yavaneswara, 

16. The twelve signs of the Zodiac beginning from 
the ascendant are knowu technically as the signs of (1) 
Kalpa (power), (2) Sva (wealth), (3) Vikrama (prowess), (4) 
Graha (dwelling place), (5) Pratibha (intelligence), (6) 
Kshata (wound), (7) Maumatha (desire), (8) Randhra, (9) 
Guru (father or preceptor), (10) Mana (respectability), (11) 
Bliava (acquisition), (12) Vyaya (loss). The 4th and 8th 
hquses are known as Chaturasra signs. The 7th house is 
known as Dyuna and the 10th house is known as Ajna. 

notes; 

A number of astrological terms are defined in this 
stanza. 


17. The 1st, 4th, 7th and 10th houses are known as 
Kantaka or Kendra or Chatushtaya houses (quadrants or 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBIHAT JATAKi. , 


18 


CH. I.] 


angles). If these four houses should happen to he biped, 
aquatic, oeutiped and quadruped respectively, they then 
possess strength., . ' 

NOTES. 

The biped signs are: Gemini, Libra, Virgo, the first ' 
half of Sagittari and Aquarius. ' fl ra (. 

The aquatic signs are: Cancer, the £m 4 half of Capri 
corn,and Pisces. 

The only centiped sign is Soorpio. 

The quadruped signs are Aries, Taurus, Leo, the second 
half of (Sagittari an^of Capricorn. . 


■ i I ' ' 

18. , The houses next to the angles are known as Pana- 

f thara houses and those next to them are known as. Apok- 
ima houses. The 4th house is known as Hibuka, Amba, 

Snkha and Vesma. The 7th house is known as Jamitra. 

The 5th house is known as Trikona. The 10th house is 

• , | * t , . • 

known as Meshoorana and Karma. . . v 

NOTES. 

Panapbara and Apoklima are Greek terms. 

The Panaphara houses are the 2nd, 5th, 8th and 11th 
houses. 

The Apoklima houses are the 3rd, 6th, 9th and 12th 
houses. ! J 


19. If the lord of the asoondant or Jupiter or Mercury 
should either occupy it or aspect it, the ascendant (Lagna) 
would become powerful and not by other planets, JL’be 
Kendra signs are naturally powerful (a) The biped signs 
are powerful during the day, the quairuped signs at night, 
and the centiped signs at sunrise and at sunset. The Mana 
(measurement) ( i ) of the first six signs from Aries 
are 20, 24, 28, 82, 36, and 40 respectively ,* and those 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




14 BBIHAT JATAKA. [CH. II. 

of the next six signs are 40, 86,82, 28, 24, and 20 respeo* 
tively. The 3rd house is known as JJuschikya. The 9th 
as Tapas and Tritrikona. 

NOTES. 

(a) It therefore follows that Pannphara houses Are' 
less powerful than the Kendras, and Apoklima houses are 

the weakest houses of all. 

( b ) This is used in stanza 23, Ch. Y. 

20. The twelve signs beginning from Aries are res* 
pectively (Aries) red, (Taurus) white, (Qemini)of the color of 
the parrot, (Cancer), of the color of Patali (trumpet flower), 
(Leo) black white, (Yirgo) variegated in color, (Libra) 
black, (Scorpio) of gold oolor, (Sagittari) of the color of-the 
busk of paddy, (Capricorn) white red, (Aquarius) of the color 
of Mongoose, and (Pisces) of the color of fish.. The signs 
are known as Plava (depressed) in the direction of their* 
lords. The 2nd house to that oooupied by the Sun is known 
as Yesi. 

NOTES. 

(a) For the use of this vide stanza 21, Ch. Y. 
CHAPTER II. 

Definitions and Elementary principles oontinn. 
ed—(Planetary) . 

. 1. To the Kalapurusha, the Sun is the soul, the Moon 
is the mind, Mars is strength, Meroury'is speech, Jupiter is 
knowledge and health, Venus is desire, and Saturn is sorrow. 
Of the planets the Sun and Moon are kings, Mars is Gene* 
ral,-Mercury is the first prinoa,' Jupiter and Venus are 
u« sellers and Saturn is servant. J 


Digitized by t^,ooQle 



OH. II. J 


BRIRAT J AT AKA. 


15 


2. Heli is the Sun ; Seetharasmi is the Moon ; Hcmna, 
Vit, Gna, Bodhana and Indnpntra (Son of Moon) are the 
names of Mercury ; Ara, Vakrs, Kroradrik, Avaneya (son 
of Earth) are the names of Mars; Kona, Manda, SuryaputrA 
(son of the Sun) and Asiba (the black planet) are the names 
of Saturn. 

8. Jeeva, Angirasa, Hnraguru (the preceptor of the* 
Devas), Vachasampati, Ijya are the names of Jupiter; Sukra, 
Bhrigu, Bhrigusuta, Situ ttbe white planet),Asphujit, are the 
names of Venus; Tama (darkuess), Agu and Asura are the 
names of Rahu (the Moon’s ascending node); Sikhi is the 
name of Ketu (the Moon’* descending node). Terms 
synonymous with the above should - also 1 be accepted 
(as the names of the several planets). 

4* The Sun is'of a red and dark-brown color; the 
Moon is white ; Mars is not of a tall figure, and is both red 
and white; Mercury is green like the color of the bent 
grass ; Jupiter is yellow like molten gold; Venus is neither, 
very white nor very black, and Saturn is black. 

NOTES. 

The Color of a person will be that of the planet most 
powerful^at the time of his birth. 

5. Tho Sun presides over copper color; the Moon 
over white color; Mars over red color; Mercury over green 
oolor; Jupiter over yellow color; Venus over a mixture of 
various colors; and Saturn over black color, (a) 

The Sun is Agni; the Moon is Varuna; Mars is 
Subbramania;Mercury is Vishnu ; Jupiter is Indra; Venus 
is Indrani (Indra’s wife); and Sa turn is Brahma (6)' . 

‘ The Sun presides over east; Venus, south-east; Mars 
south; Rahu 6otith-west; Saturn west; the Moon north* 
west; Mercury north ; Jupiter north-east. (*) 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



irt bbihaT jataka. [ch. If. 

The waning Moon, the Sun, Mars, Saturn and Mercury ' 
when in conjunction with any of these are maleiio 
planets (d r 

NOTES. 

(a) These are useful in ascertaining the color of stolen 
articles and in determining the color of the flowers to be 
used in the worship of the planets. 

( b ) From the powerful planet at the time of one’s birth* 
it can be ascertained which particular Deva a person would 
worship. 

(c) . These are useful in determining the position of 
the entrance of the delivery room of a woman and in die 
covering the direction of escape of thieves. 

(d) Jupiter, Venus and Mercury when in conjunction 
with either of these, are benefie plauets* 

6. Mercury and Saturn are hermaphrodite planets (a); 
theMQonand Venus are female plauets, and the rest (6) 
are male planets. . Mars is fire; Meroury is earth ; Jupiter 
is akas (ether) ; Venus is water; and Saturn is air.(c) 

* ' . NOTES. 

(a) Meronry is female hermaphrodite and Saturn is 
male hermaphrodite. 

( b) That is, the San, Mars and Jupiter are male 
planets. 

(c) Also the Son is fire and the Moon water. 

7. Venns and Jupiter are Brahmins ; Mars and the 

Sun are Kshatriyas ; the Moon is a Vysya ; Mercury is a 
Sudra ; and Saturn is a Chandala. 

The Moon, the Sun and Jupiter aria of Satwaguna 
(good temper) ; Meroury and Venns are of Rsjognna (pas¬ 
sionate temper) • Mars and Saturn areof Tamoguna (dark 
temper) 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKi. 


2? 


CH. Il.j 

8. The Sun haasomewbai yellow eyes, ie of the height 
of the length of the two at-ms stretched out, of bilious 
nature and with very little hair' on his head. 

•» ' i ( . . . , , 

The Moon- has a thin and a round body, is 
of an exceedingly windy and : phlegmatic nature, is 
learned and has a soft voice and beautiful , eyes. 

9. Mars has sharp and cruel eyes and a young body, , 
is generous^ of bilious nature, of Unsteady mind, and has a 
narrow middle. 

Mercury has an impediment in his speech, is fond of 
joke, and is of a bilious, windy and phlegmatic nature. 

" 10. Jupiter has a big body, (a) yellow hairs and eyes, 

high intellectual powers, and a phlegmatic nature. ' 

Venus leads a comfortable life, has a beautiful body, fair 
eyes, a windy and phlegmatic nature, and black curling 
hairs. 

. .. ,r NOTES. . 

(<0 Jupiter is the biggest of all planets, and the 
auoient Hindus were aware of it centuries ago. 

11. Saturn is lazy, has eyes of gold color, a thin and 
tall body, large teeth, stiff hair, and is of a windy nature. ■ 

Saturn is strong in muscles, the Sun iti bones, the 
Moon in blood. Mercury in skin, Venus in semen, Jupiter in 
flesh,, and Mars in the marrow of the bones. 

12. The Sun presides over the place of worship ; the 
Moon over wells; Mars over the fire place; Mercury over 
play grounds;‘Jupiter over the store room; Venus over 

: <*bed room, and Saturn over plaoos where :swoopings aro 
gathered. 

The garment of the Sun is of thick thread; that of 
the Moon is new; that of Mars is partly burnt; that of 


Digitized by t^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKi. 


J8 


[oh. 11. 


Mercury is wet /that of Jupiter is somewhat used that 
of Venus is strong ; and that of Saturn is torn. 

The San presides over copper ; the Moon over gems; 
Mars over gold; Mercury over brass; Jupiter over silver ;(o) 
Venus over pearls; and Saturn over iron. 

When either Saturn is in the ascendant or when his 
Drekkana is rising, the season denoted is Sisira—January 
and February. 

When either Venus is in the ascendant, or when his 
Drekkana is rising, the Beason denoted is Vasantha (Spring) 

>—March and April.. 

Similarly in the case of the Sun or Mars, the season ' 
denoted is Greeshma (Summer)—May and June. In the 
case of the Moon, the season is Varsha (Winter)—July, and 
August. In the case of Mercury stheeason is Sarat— 
September and Ootober. Aud in the case of Jupiter the 
season is Hemanta—November and Deoember. 

NOTES. 

(a) When Jupiter is in his house. He presides over 
gold. 


23. All the planets aspect the 3rd and 10th houses 
with a quarter sight, the 5th and 9th houses with half a 
sight, the 4th aud 8th^houses with three-quarters of a 
sight, and the 7th house with a full sight; but Saturn, as- 
peots the 3rd and 10th houses with a full sight; Jupiter 
aspeots the 5th and 9th houses with a full sight, and Mars 
aspects the 4th and 8th houses with a full sight. 

NOTES* 

Suppose A to be a point in the eoliptio occupied by an 
aspecting planet; divide the eoliptic into 12 equal parts of 
30° each, beginning from A. So that the 12 points of divi¬ 
sion will be those respectively marked by A, 30°, 60 ,90® 
120®, 150°, 180°, 210°, 240°, 270°, 300®, and 330®, and 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. II.} BRIHAT JkTkKk. 10 

for purposes of planetary aspects, these points are respect¬ 
ively the middle points of the lBt, 2nd, 3rd. 4th, &c. to 1 i 
houses. So that a planet at A aspects with a quarter Bight 
the middle points of the 3rd and 10th houses, t. s. f the 
points marked 60° and 270° respectively; similary it as- 
pects with a half sight points marked 120° and 240° 
with three-quarters of a sight points marked 90° and 210°; 
and with a full sight point marked 180°. The degree of 
aspects for other places most be determined by proportion 
or rnle of three, from the degree of aspects of the next points 
before and behind. As regards the special aspects of Sa- 
turn, Jupiter and Mars, a similar course should be adopted- 
But if one planet aspects another planet, then subtract the 
longitude of the former from that of the latter, t. e, take 
the distance between the two plauets in degree and calcu¬ 
late the degree of aspect as stated above. 

14. The Sun indicates six months; the Moon two 
Ghatikas or forty-eight minutes; Mors a day; Mercury 
two months ; Jupiter a month; Venus a fortnight; and Sa¬ 
turn a year. 

The Sun presides over pungent flavor ; the Moon over 
salt flavor ; Mars over acerbity ; Mercury over mixed fla¬ 
vor ; Jupiter over sweetness; Venus over sourness; and 
Saturn over bitterness. 

15* According to some Jupiter is tbe friend of tbe 
Sun ; Jupiter and Mercury are the friends of the Moon ; 
Venus and Mercury are the friends of Mars. The Moon, , 
Mars, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn are the friends of Mer- 
cnry. The Sun/ the Moon, Mercnry, Venus and Saturn, 
are the friends of Jupiter. Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and 
Saturn are the friends of Venus. Mercury, Jupiter and 
Venus are the frieuds of Saturnfa). But according to 
Satj acharya a planet’s friends are the lords of the 2nd 
I2bb, 5th, 9th, 8th, and 4th houses from his Moolatrikoua 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



20 


BRIHAT J AT AKA-' 


[CH. II. 

pignas well as the lord of the exaltation sign of such 
planet 9 provided they do not confliot with the lords of the ’ 
remaining honses.(6), 

NOTES. 

(а) The other planets are the enemies. 

(б) The same may be expressed otherwise: the lords 
of the,remaining houses are the foes of a planet, provided 

they do not conflict with the lords'of the seven houses des¬ 
cribed above. Putting the two together we get the fol¬ 
lowing results: 

(1) . Those lords of the seven houses who may not at 
the same time be the lords of the remaining houses are the 
friends of the particular planet. 

(2) Those lords of the latter houses who may not at 
the same time be the lords of the former houses arethe^foes 
of the particular planet. * 

(3) And those who may be the lords of both are 
neither the friends nor the foes of the particular planet. 

Following the above rule, the author himself gives for 
eaoh planet, his friends, foes, and neutrals in the following 
two stanzas. (Vide note at the end of stanza 17).* 

16. Saturn and Venus are the enemies of the Sun, 
Mercury is his neutral, and the rest are his friends. 

The Sun and Mercury are the' friends of the Moon and 
the rest are her neutrals, (a) 

' The Sun, the Moon, and Jupiter are the friends of 
Mars; Mercury is his enemy, and Venus and Saturn arediis 
neutrals. 

The Sun and Venus are the friends of Mercury ; the 
Moon is his enemy, and the rest aro his neutrals. 

17. Mercury and Venus are the enemies of Jupiter ; 
Saturn is his neutral, and the rest are his friends. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA. 


21 


ch.ii] 

Mercury And Saturn are the friends of Venus ; Mars 
and Jupiter are her neutrals* and the rest are her enemies* 

Venus and Mercury are the friends of Saturn ; Jupiter 
is his neutral, and the rest are,his enemies*(h) 

Thus have I stated oyer . again at length the views of ' 
Satyacharya regarding the natural or permanent frienship, 
enmity and neutrality among planets* 

NOTES. 

(а) The Moon has no enemies. 

(б) We will now examine how the author arrived at N 
the three results given in the last two stanzas. Take the 
oase of the Sun. His Moolatrikona house is Leo. (Vide 
stanza 14.) The 2nd, 12th, 5th, 9th, 8th, and 4th honses 
from Leo are respectively Virgo, Cauoer, Sagittari, Aries, 
Pisces and Scorpio. The exaltation houses of the Sun is 
Aries. The lords of all these houses are respectively Mer¬ 
cury, the Moon, Jupiter, Mars, Jupiter, Mar and Mars 
or dropping the repetitions, we get, Mercury, Moon Jupiter 
and Mars. . Of the 7 houses Aries being repeated, we have 
been dealing with only six houses. The other six honses 
of the Zodiac are Leo, Libra, Capricorn, Aquarius, Taurus 
and Gemini. Their lords are respectively the Sun, Venus, 
Saturn, Saturn. Venus and v Mercnry, or dropping the repe¬ 
titions, and also the Sun, we get Venus, Saturn and Mer¬ 
cury. We will compare these with the lords of the former 
get of houses, viz, Mercury, Moon, Jupiter, and Mars. We 
find that Mercury is the only planet ocouriog in both tho 
lists. It is therefore the Sun's neutral. Venus and Sa¬ 
turn are his enemies, and the Moon, Mars aud Jupiter are 
bis friends. And so with the other planets. 

18. Planets that occupy the 2nd, 12th, 11th, 3rd, 10th 
and 4th houses from a particular planet are the friends of 
that planet and the rest are his enemies for tho time. > Ac¬ 
cording to some, the planets that occupy the exaltation 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



22 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


[OS. II« 


sign of a particular planet are also tbe friends of that pla¬ 
net. Combining together the three natural relations (vide 
stanzas 16 and 17) with the two relations for the time now 
given, we may determine the five following relations exist¬ 
ing between planets: Atimitra (great friend), Mitra 
(friend), Sama (neutral), Satru (enemy) and Atisatru, 
(great enemy.) 

NOTES. 

Stanzas 16 and 17 relate to the three relations of per¬ 
manent friendship, neutrality and enmity. Stanza 18 re¬ 
lates to the two relations of temporary friendship and en¬ 
mity. Combining the two together we get the following 
results. 


Under Stanzas 

Uuder Stanza 

Result. 

16 & 17 


18. 


Mitra. 

+ 

Mitra. = 

Atimitra. 

Satru. 

+ 

Satru. === 

Atisatru. 

Sama. 

+ 

Mitra* = 

Mitra. 

Sama. 

+ 

Satru. = 

Satru. 

Mitra* 

+ 

Satru. = 

* Sama. 

19. A planet 

has sthanabala (local or positional 


strength) when in his exaltation sign,(a) friendly sign,(6) 
Brekkanu/c) in his Navamsa,(d) or in his Kshetra, house.(e) 
ybl' 7~ yi Ifercury and Jupiter are powerful when in theEastf/) or 
Wising sign. The Sun and Mars are powerful when on the 
south or tenth sign, Saturn is powerful when in the West 
or settiug sign, and the Moon and Venus are powerful 
when in the North or the 4th sign (Patala). 

NOTES. 


(a) 

vide 

I. (18). 

(b) 


II. 16 to 18. 

00 


I. 11 and 12. 

(d) 

ft 

I. 6. 

(«) 

99 

1.6. 


Digitized by 


Google 



SRHIAT JATAXA. 


23 


OH. II.] 


. (f) that is : they then possess Dikbala. According 
to some oommentators, Mercury and Jupiter are powerful 
when in the Eastern triangular signs of Aries, Leo and 
Sagittari. The Sun and Mars are powerful when in the 
Southern triangular signs of Taurus, Virgo and Capricorn. 
Saturn is powerful when in the Western triangular signs, of 
Germini, Libra and Aquarius j and the Moon and Venoa 
are powerful when in the Northern triangular signs of Can¬ 
cer, Scorpio and Pisoes, 


20. The Sun and the Moon possess ChesMdbata 
(motional strength) when in any of the six signs from 
Makara. The other planets possess it when in their retro¬ 
grade motion or when in conjunction with the Moon 
(Samagatna) or when in their greatest brillianoy or when 
they happen to be the northern planets in planetary 
conjunction (Tudba). 

21. The Moon, Mars and Saturn possess Kaldbala 
(temporal strength) at night ; Mercury possesses it both 
day and night; and the other planets(a) possess it by day* 
The malefic planets possess it during the waning moon 
(Krishna paksha) and the benefio planets during the wax¬ 
ing moon (Sukla paksha). Also eaoh planet has it in his 
year, month, day and hour. 

Saturn, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus the Moon and 
the Sun are eaoh naturally stronger than the immediately 
preceding planet in the order stated.(&) 

NOTES. 

(o) That is, ths Sun, Jupiter, r——A— 

(b) Such strength is known as Naisargikabala. 

Before applying the astrologioal truths contained in 
the subsequent pages, the reader must consider the strength 
or weakness of each house, of its Lord, and of the planets 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



24 


BBIfiAT JATAKA. 


CH. It. 


occupying or aspecting suoh bouse. For these and various 
other purposes it will not do to have a mere Itasi Ohakra or 
Navamsa Chakra to represent roughly the planetary posi¬ 
tions. The actual longitudes (sphuta) of the planets and 
of Lagoa from Eevati should be known. 






Digitized by ^.ooQle 



Cm. 3.J J9HIHA9 JATAXA. 

r . CHAPTER III. 

Ok Annual and YianTABLB I 

1. If, at the time of birth’[(a), the malo^tanets (i) 
be powerful (c), the benefio planets ( d) weak, and one of the 
hermaphrodite planets (e) either be in one of the Kendras 
(angles) (/) or aspect the Lagna (ascendant); the creature 
born will be that indicated by the particular DtoadasanisaQg) 
.which the Moon might then occupy (h). • 

Notes. 

(a) Or at the time of query, adds the Commentator. 

- (6) Fotf the mnsouline planets, vide If. 8. 

(c) For the strength of the planets, vide II. 19,20 & 21. 

( d) For the benefic planets, vide II. 6* ’ 

(e) For the hermaphrodita planets, vide II. 6. 

(f) For the Kendras or angles, vide I. 17. 

(g) For Dwadasamsa, vide I.6. , ! 

( h ) For instance, suppose at the time of birth the 
Moon ocoupies the 20° of Leo. As a Dwadasamsa contains 
'2} degrees, the 21° of Leo is the ninth Dwadasamsa of ]^eo. 
As the names of the Dwadasamsas of Leo begin from Leo, 

. the ninth Dwadasamsa is that of Pisces. The creature bofrn 
will therefore be a fish. 

Besides, the number of the offspring will be that repre- 
‘ sen ted by the number of Dwadasamsas passed over by the 
‘Moon. Of'those the number of odd Dwadasamsa will 
f represent the male issue, and the number of even Dwada- 
earosas will represent the female issues; the number that 
* will perish immediately after birth will be that of the num¬ 
ber of the Dwadasamsas that might be occupied by tlio 
r malefic planets’or that might otherwise become weak. fl : * 
—The reader will in future kindly refer to the 
♦able of reference published after the Introduction for the 
t meaning of any term* - ' v. r 4 • 


■es' 

¥ 


(BOSCOPT. 


% 




Digitized by ^.ooQle 




24 


BBIHAT JATAKA. 


{oh. 3; 


2. If the malefio planets occupy their Navamaas and 
be powerful, and if (at the same time) the Lagna (rising 
sign) bo other than human(a), the birth trill be that of a 
lower animal as before(h), 

Notes. 

(a) The rising should be other than Gemini, Yirgo, 
Libra, the"seoond half ofSngittari and Aquarius. 

(1) That is, the creature will be that represented by 
the Dwadasamsa which the Moon' might then occupy. 


3. In the case of quodrupeds Aries is the head ; Taurus 
the face and neck Gemini, the forelegB and shoulders; 
Canoer, the baok; Leo, the breast,* Yirgo, the sides; Libra, 
the belly,* Scorpio, the anus; Sagittari, the hind legs ; 
Caprioorn, the penis or testicle > Aquarius, the buttocks 
and Pisces, the tail. 

Notes. 

In the case of birds the wings stand for the forelegs. 
This stanza will also enable ns to ascertain the color or 
wounds of particular parts of the creature’s body, 

4. If there be any planet in the rising sign, the color 
of the creature will be that of the planet itself ,* if not the 
color will be that of the planet aspectiug the rising sign ; 
and if no planets aspect the rising sign the color will be 
that of the rising Navamsa. The number and variety of 
colors will.be that of the planets occupying or aspecting 
the rising sign(a). The number of stripes on the back of 
the creature will be that of the planets occupying the 
seventh honse. 

Notes. 

(a) The-color of the powerful planet will predominate* 


Digitized by t^ooQle 



CtL 3.] 


BUfllAT QATAKA. 


25 


5. Ifeither ft Pakshidrekknna (a) or n Charanavnmsn(&) 
or a Navamsa of Mercury(c) sliould rise and bo occupi¬ 
ed by powerful planets, the creature born would be a land 
bird if the rising Drekkana or Navamsa, be either occupied 

or aspected by Saturn j and a water bird if it be occupied or 
aspccted by the Moon. 

Nt 03 

(a) These ore the second Drekkana or degrees from 
]1 to 20 of Gemini, the first Drekkna or degrees from 1 to 
10 of Leo, the second Drekkana of Libra and the first Drek¬ 
kana of Aquarius. 

( b ) Chara or movable Navamsas go by" the same 
names as the Ohara or movable signs. 

(c.) The Navamsas of Mercury are those of Gemini 
and Virgo. 

6. If the rising sign, the Moon, Jupiter and tlio 
Sun should bo weak, they indicate the birth of a tree ; 
such tree will be either a land tree or a water tree accord¬ 
ing as the rising Navamsa is one of land or water (a). Tho 
number of trees will be tho number of signs by which 
the lord of the ascendant Navamsa has receded from the 
rising sign(5). 

Notes. 

(a) The wates Navamsas are tho*o of Cancer, tho 
second half of the Navamsa of Makara and the Navamsa of 
Pisces. The other Navamsas are those of land. 

(b) For instance : suppose the 10° of Leo to rise, tho 
rising Navamsa is that of Gemini ; it is a land Navamsa. 
Tho treo will therefore bo one growing on dry laud. Tho 
lord of Gemini is Morcury. Suppose Mercury to occupy 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



26 BEIHAT JATAKA. [CH. 4 h 

Sugittari at the time. Prom Leo to Sagittari is 5 signs. 
Tho number of trees will therefore be 5. 

Again, if the lord of the ascendant Navamsa should be 
either in the exaltation sign or retrograde in his motion, 
the number already obtained should bo trebled ; but if he 
should bo in his Vargottamabhaga or in his own Navamsa 
or Sign or Drekkann, such number should bo doubled. For 
instance : in tho instance cited above, if Mercury should 
either be retrograde in motion and occupy his exaltation 
sign, namely, Virgo, the number, viz., two from Leo should 
be trebled- This will give us six. But if Mercury should 
occupy the last Na\ amsa of Libra, (one of his Navamsas) 
the number is 8 X 2=6. If he should occupy Gemini the num¬ 
ber is 11 X2=22 ; and if ho should occupy, for instance, tho 
second Drekkana of sigh Taurus, tho number is 2 x 10=20. 

7. If the lord of tho ascendant Navamsa be the Sun(a), 
the tree will be one strong within ; if Saturn, the tre e 
will be an ugly one ; if the Moon, it will bo a milky tree ; 
if Mars, a thorny tree ; if Jupiter, a fruit tree ; if Mercury, 
a fruitless tree ; if Venus, a flower tree ; if the Moon 
again, au oily tree ; and if Mars, a tree of sour taste. 

Notes. 

(a) The conditions given in the last stanza remaining 
the same. 

8. If the lord of^ the ascendant Navomsa beabene- 
fkrplanet occupying a malefic sign(a), tho tree will be a 
superior one growing on a bad ground ; if otherwise, the 
reverse will be the case (6) ; the number of trees is also 
the number of Navamsas by which the lord of the ascen¬ 
dant Navamsa has receded from his Navamsa, 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



OH* 4 ] 


BklHAT 8AM Bit A* 


27 


Notes. 

• (a). The Other conditions given in stanza 6 remaining 

the same. -* 

(ft). Tiiat is, if the lord of the ascendant Navamsa be 
malefic planet occupying a benefio house, the tree will be. 
an inferior one growing on a good ground. 


CHAPTER IV* 

On Nisheka Kala or Tbi time or Conception. 

1* The menses that appear monthly, because of Mars 
avid the Moon (a) (bring about conception) when the Moon 
'is in one of the Annnpachaya signs(7/). If the Moon be other* 
wise (r) and be aspected by a benefio male planet(d), there 
will be sexual union between a woman and her husband. 

Notes. 

(a) Menses appear in women whenever the Moon is 
.aspected by Mins* that is especially when the Moon occu¬ 
pies the 4th* 7th or the 8th house from Mars. I 11 connec¬ 
tion with this subject the author of Saravali says : 

“The Moon is water; Mars is fire; a mixture of water 
• and fire is bilo ; when the bile mixes with the blood* men¬ 
strual discharge occurs.” 

(b) If* when aspected by Mars, the Moon happens 
to occupy one of the Anupachaj'a signs in the horosoope or 
nativity of the woman, at the time of the appearance of 
the menses, conception will follow. The Upachaya signs 

. arq the 3rd* 6th, 10th and the 11th houses from the ascen¬ 
dant * and the other signs are known as Anupacbaya signs. 

( 0 ). That is from the time the woman bathes on the 
4th day* when the Moon reaches one of the Upaohayn 
houses in the horoscope or nativity of the husband. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBIttAT JATAttA* 


33 


[on .8, 


(<l). There will be sexual union between the husband 
and wife if the Moon, is aspected by Jupiter wheq power¬ 
ful, The Commentator adds os follows : . 

“If the Moon is aspeoted by the Sun, the woman will 
have sexual union with an officer of the king $ if aspected 
by Mttrs, then with a voluptuary ; if aspected by Mercury, 
then with a person of fickle mind ; if aspected by Venus, 
then with a beantiful person; if aspected by Sal urn, then 
with a servant; and if aspected by several malefic planets, 
the woman will become a harlot.” 


2. If at the time of sexual union,. the setting sign 
be either occupied or aspected by malefic planets, such 
n nion will be attended with anger, and if by benefio planets, 
it will be attended with {flay and laughter. 

Notes. 

The Commentator adds that if the setting sign be 
occupied or aspected by both malefic and benefio planets, 
the union will be attended with both joy and displeasure. 


3. If, at the time of sexual union, the Sun, the Moon, 
Venus and Mars be in their Navamsas(a), or if Jupiter 
oooupy the rising sign or the 5th or 9th sign from it, such 
union will produce a child. To persons devoid of verility* 
the above Toga (planetary positions) will be as useless os 
the rays of the Moon to the blind. 

Notes. 

The Commentator adds that there would also be 
oonoeption when these four planets are not in their Navnm- 
sas, if the Sun and Venus should ocoupy the IJpachaya 
signs in the horoscope of the man and at the same time 
bo in their Navamsas, or if Murs and the Moon should 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



6h. 4/j 4 BBIHAT JATAKA. 29 

ocoupy the Upachaya signs in the horoscope of the woman 
and at the sfcrne time be in their Navamsafc. ' 

* 4. If at the time of conception# either Mars or Saturn 

shonld ocoupy the seventh bouse from the Sun or Moon the 
man and his wife would respectinely fall ill (a) ; but if one 
of the two planets, Murs and Jupiter, should occupy the 
twelfth and the other the second house from the Sun and 
Moon, or if one of the planets should be in coujuuction 
with the Suu or Moon and the other should .aspect either 
the Sun or the Moon, the tnan and his wife will respectively 
meet with deuth (6). 

« Notes. * 

(a) In.tlie Month of Mars or Saturn as the oase may 
bo (vide Stanza 16). 

(M. In the month of either Saturn or Mars whoever ia 
powerful.’ * * * 

The Comment itor adds that the two effects described 
in the Stanza will occur before and not after the birth of 
the child* 

6. In the case of conception (a) by day, the Sun and 
Venus represent respectively the father and the mother ; 
and by night, Saturn and the Moon represent respectively 
the father and the mother. In the (former case Saturn atid 
the Moon represent respectively the paterual uncle and the 
maternal aunt ; and in the latter case the Sun and Venus 
represent respectively the paternal uncle and the maternal 
aunt* If the planets representing the father and the 
paternal uude should occupy the odd signs, or if the planets 
representing the mother and the maternal aunt should occu¬ 
py the even signs at the time, then the father and paternal 
uno le or the mother and the maternal aunt would be happy 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



30 


[oh- 4} 


BBIHAT IkTkXkl 

Kotos. 

(a) Or birth acoordiag to the Commentator. 

6. If at the time of conception malefic planets occupy 
the twelfth house (a), and if then the rising sign be not 
aspected by benefic planets, or if Saturn ocoupy the rising 
sign and be aspected by the waiting Moon and Mars 
(in either case) the pregnant woman will die {by 

Kotos. 

(o) The second house according to certain Comment 
tutors. 

{b) Before delivery time according to Commentator. 

7. If (at the time) either the rising sign or the Moon 
or both be between malefic planets (a) and at the same time 
not aspect ed by the benefio planets, the preguant woman 
.will die (b). 

... Notes. 

(a) As the malefio planets in the present case can 
.only be three, vis., the Sun, Mars, and Saturn, both the 
rising sign and the Moon oau be between them at the same 
time either when they are together or occupy two alternate 
houses. The Commentator adds that malefic planets might 
occupy either the 12th and the 2nd houses from the asceu- 
dant or the Moon or both, or they might ocoupy the Navam- 
sos on either side. 

(b) Before delivery and in the month of the powerful 
malefic planet. 

8. If (at the time) malefic planets occupy the fourth 
'house and Mars the eighth house from the ascendant or th 


Digitized by Tooele 



CH. 4] 


DBIHAT JATAKA. 


31 


Moon, or again if Mara occupy the fourth house and the 
Sun the twelfth house from the asoendant, the pregnant 
woman will die. 

9. If (at the time) Mars occupy the Lagna and the 
Snn occupy the seventh house, the pregnant woman will 
suffer death from weapons* If the lord of any month (a) 
bo afflicted, the pregnancy will miscarry in that month. 

Notes* 

(a) For the lords of the several months of pregnancy 
vide Stanza 16* 

10. If the benefic planets(a)be with the Moon or in 
the ascendant (6), or if they occupy the second, fourth, fifth, 
seventh, ninth and the tenth houses from the Mooq or the 
ascendant, there will be safe delivery, provided malefic 
planets occupy the third or eleventh house from the Moon 
or the ascendant, and the Moon or the ascendant, is at the 
s&me time aspected by the Snn. (c) 

Notes* 

(a) Those are Mercury, Jupiter and Venus* 

(b) Or both at tlie same time. 

(c) Acoording to some other reading, by Jupiter. 
But this is oppised to Sar&vali. . 

H. If (u) the rising sign, tho Sun, Jupiter and the 
Moon be powerful and occupy tho odd (male) signs and 
the odd Navamsas, the* issue will be a male child (&) ; if. 
they occupy the even (female) signs and the even Navamsas, 
the issue will be a female child ( c); if again, the Snn and 
Ju pi tor (d) occupy the odd signs, tho issue will bo. a male 
child; and if tho Moon, Venus and Mars(e) occupy the even 
signs, the issue will be a female child* Also, if the Sun and 

5 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



32 


BBIHAT JATAKA. 


[OH. 

Jupiter occupy the two male doable bodied NavamsasT) 
and be aspected by Mercury, the issue will be mole twins; 
aud if Venus and Mars oocupy the two female doable 
bodied Navamsas(p)and be aspected by Mercury, the issue 
will be female twins(A). 

Notes. 

(a) At the time of conception or of birth or of query 
about the one or the other according to Commentator. 

(6 & o') If some of the planets be in the male and some 
in the female signs or Navamsas, then the sex of the issue 
will be that which predominates. 

(d Sj- e) The planets should be powerful also. 

(f) These are the Navamsas of Gemini and Sagittari. 

(g) These are the Navamsas of Virgo and Pisoes. 

(A) The issue will be male twins as well as female 
twins, if all the four double bodied Navamsas be so ocoupied. 

12. If (at the time)(a) Saturn ocoupy any of the odd 
signs from the rising sign(h), the issue will be a male child. 

The sex of the issue in air the above cases shall be 
determined by the position of the most powerful planet. 

Notes. 

(a) Of conception or query according to Commentator. 

(&) This Yoga applies only in the absence of the 
Yoga mentioned already. 

N . B .—Yoga is a particular position of one or more 
planets either relatively to one another or absolutely in the 
ecliptio or both. 

13. (If at the time of conception), the Moon and the 
Sun, occupying respectively any of the even and odd signs, 
aspect each other, or (2), if Saturn and Mercury (occupying 




Digitized by ^.ooQle 



Bam AT JATAKA. 


33 


Off. 4.] 

respectively any of the even and odd signs) aspect each 
other, or (3) if Mars (in an odd sign) aspect (or beaspected 
by) the San in an even sign, or (4) if the Moon and Lagna 
in odd signs be aspeoted by Mars (in an even sign), or (5) 
if Mars aspect the Moon and Mercury occupying respec¬ 
tively even and odd signs, or (6) if Venus, Lagna and the 
Moon occupy (male signs and) male Navamsas, the issue 
will be a hermaphrodite* 

Notes. 

These Nnpumsnka Togas take effect only in the absence 
of male and female Togas. 

14. If, when the Moon and Venus are in even signs, 
Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and Lagna be in odd signs, or if a 
male planet aspect Lagna and the Moon in the even signs, 
or if Mercury, Mars, Jupiter and Lagna be powerful and 
occupy even signs, the issue will be a male and a female 
child. Again, if Lagna and all the planets occupy the 
Ubbaya (common) Navamsas and bo aspected by Mercury 
in his Navamsa, the issue will be three children : of these, 
two will be male children if the Navamsa occupied by Mer¬ 
cury be that of‘Gemini, and two will be female children if 
such Navamsa be that of Virgo. Again, if, when Mercury 
occupies the Navamsa of Gemini, the other planets and 
Lagna occupy the Navamsas of Gemini and Sagittari, all 
the three will bo male children; and if, when Morcury occu¬ 
pies the Navamsa of Virgo, the other planets and Lagna 
oocupy the Navamsas of Virgo and Pisces, all the three 
will be female children. 

15. If the last Navamsa of sign Sogittari begio to rise, 
if all the planets occupy the Navamsa of Sagittari and be 
powerful, and if the rising sign be aspeoted by powerful 
Mercury and Saturn, the issue will be more than three 
children(a) 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



S4 1 BttlnAT JATAKA. [OH. 4. 

Notes. 

(a) That is 5or 7 or 10 according to Commentator# 

10. In 4 tho first month of pregnancy the embryo is 
formed; in the second, it becomes flesh ; in the third, the 
limbs aro formed; in the fourth, the bones are formed > 
in the fifth, the skin is formed ; in the sixth, tho hair begins 
to grow , in the seventh, intelligence is infused into tho 
child(a). 

The lords of tho several months from tho first to the 
seventh are Yenus, Mars, Jupiter, tho Sun, the Moon, 
Saturn and Mercury respectively. 

Notes. 

(a) In tho eighth month, the child begins to eat 
through tho navel cord. In the ninth mouth, the child is 
filled with cares, and in the tenth mouth the child is bora- 
The lord of the 8th month is tho lord of the rising sign at 
tho time of conception. The lord of tho 9th month is the 
Moon, and tho lord of the 10th month is the Sun. Accord¬ 
ing to Yuvaneswarn, the lord of the first inontli is Mars 
and that of the second mouth is Youus. 

There will bo miscarriage of pregnancy in that month 
whose lord happens to be afflicted at tho time of conception ; 
bub if any of tho planets be of dim appearance, the fetus 
will simply suffer in tho month of tho particular planets. 
If tho Sun be powerful the child would resemble its father, 
and if the Moon bo powerful, the child would resemble its 
mother. The health and disposition of tho child follow 
those of its parents at the time of conception. 

17. If Morcury occupy tho fifth or ninth house(a) from 
tho rising sign, and if at the samo time the other planets be 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



uc* 4*] 


buiuat iATAKA. 


poworloss, the face, tho legs, and the hands of the child will 
bo doubled. If the Moon occupy sign Taurus and if malefic 
planets occupy the Riksha Sandbies(ftj, the issue will be a 

mute child ; but if the Moon be aspected by a beuefic 
planet, there will bo speech after a long tiuie(c). 

Notes. 

(а) According to some Commentators the word Tri- 
kona in tho text is interpreted as Moola trikona, that is 
sign Virgo here. But this is opposed to the opiuion of 
Gargo. 

(б) That is, the last Navamsas of the signs Cancer, 
Scorpio and Pisces* 

(c) But if malefic plauots aspect the Moon, tho child 
will never speak; if both malefic and benofic planets 
aspect the Moon, the effects will follow the powerful planets, 

18. If Saturn and Mars occupy either the signs or 
the Navamsas(a) of Mercury, the issue will be a child born 
with tooth. If Cancer be the rising sign and if tho Moon 
ocoupy it and bo aspected by Saturn snd Mars, the child 
will bo humpbacked ; if Pisces be tho rising sign and if 
it bo ospeoted by Saturn, tho Moon and Mars, the child 
will bo lame. If a malefic planot^ft) and the Moon be iu 
any of the last Navamsos of Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, 
tho child will bo born deaf. In all tho above Togas tho 
effects described will oocar only if the several planets are 
not aspected by Jupiter(c). 

Notes. 

(a) Or both tho signs and Navatns&s according to 
some Commentators. 

(ft) One of the three plauots, tho Sun, Mars and Sa- 
tarn. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



36 Sri n At jataka. . [get* .4. 

(c) So that if the planets be aspected by Jupiter, the 
effects will not occur. 

19. If the last Navamsa of Makara begin to rise and 
if it be aspected by Saturn, the Moon and the Sun, the 
issue will be a dwarf. If Mars occupy the rising Drek- 
kana of the fifth house or of the ninth house(a), the issue 
will be either without a head or without arms or without 
logs respectively, if Mars bo aspected by the Sun, the Moon 
and Saturn. 

Notes. 

(a) Some Commentators interpret this part of the 
text as follows ; if Mars occupy the 1st or the 2nd or the 
3rd Drpkkana of a rising sign, &o. But this is opposed to the 
opinion of Garga. 

20. If Leo be the rising sign and if it be occupied by 
the Sun and Moon and aspected by Mars and Saturn, the 
issue will be a blind child; (a) if in the above case benefio 
planets aspect the rising sign, the child will be born with a 
mote in its eyes. If the Moon or the Sun occupy the twelfth 
house from the rising sign(&), the child will be bom blind, 
respectively, of the left or the light eye(c). 

The several Yogas mentioned above(d) will not wholly 
come to pass if the planets of each Yoga bo aspected by 
benefio planets. 

Notes. 

(a) According to Commentator if the Sun alone occu¬ 
py sign Leo; and if it be aspected by Mars and Saturn, the 
child will be blind of the right eye ; and if the Moon alone 
should occupy sign Loo, and if it be aspected by Mara and 
Saturn, the oliild will be blind of the left eyo. 

(&) At the time of Nisheka (conception) or of birtb. 


Digitized by AjOOQle 



cn. 5.] BRIHAT JATAKA. 87 

ic) Provided the Sun or tie Moon is aspected by 
Mars and Saturn according to bubodhini Commentator, 

(d) That is beginning from Stanza 17. 

21. Find out the number of the particular Dwada- 
Bnmstt occupied by the Moon at the time'a) in any Zodi¬ 
acal sign. Note the Zodiacal sign whose name the Dwa- 
dasamsa bears. Count from the next sign a3 many signs as 
the number of Dwadasamsas by which the Moon may 
have advanced in any particular sign. When the Moon 
comes to such last sign the birth of the child will occur. 

Again, the birth will occur by day or by night accord¬ 
ing as the rising Navamsa at the time is a day or a night 
Navamsa. The hour of birth from sun-rise or snn-set may 
be calculated from the portiou of the rising Navamsa that 
may have risen above the horizon. 

Notes. 

(a) At the time of conception, or query according to 
Commentator. 

In this Btanza the author purposes to discover the time 
of child-birth from the time of conception or query. Suppose 
the Moon to occupy, say, the 8th Dwadusamsa of sign Aqua¬ 
rius at the time. This Dwadosamsa is known as the Dwa- 
dasamsa of Virgo (Kannya). The sigu next to sign Virgo in 
the Zodiac is sign Libra (Tula). As the Moon occupies the 8th 
Dwadasamsa in sign Aquarius, the 8th sign from Libra is 
sign Taurus* The child will therefore be born when the 
Moon passes through sign Taurus. 

The Commentator adds that the particular star which 
the Moon would occupy at the time of birth might be dis¬ 
covered from the advance made by her in the particular 
Dwadasamsa occupied by her. For instance, suppose the 
Moon to occupy the middle of the 8th Dwadasamsa in Aqua* 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



38 


BRIff AT JATAKA. 


[cn. 4. 

rius. Tho middle of sign Taurus is the 2nd quarter of Star 
Rohini; so that at tho time of birth of the child the Moon 
will occupy tho astorism of Rohini. 

Again if the rising Navnmsa for instance be that of 
Sagittari, anight sign, the birth will occur at night. The 
time of birth from sun-set should be calculated by propor* 
tion from tho time by which the Nayamsa of Sagittari may 
have risen above the horizon—the period of oblique ascen¬ 
sion of tho Navamsa representing the period of tho whole 
night. 

v The sex of the issue can bo determined from Btanzas 
11 to 16. 

22. If at the time of conception, the Navamsa of 
Batnrn(a) begin to rise and if Saturn occupy the seventh 
house from the rising sign, there will be delivery after three 
years; and in similar cose of the Moon(6) there will bo 
delivery after twelve years. 

Which of the several Yogas described in this Chapter 
are applicable to tho time of birth also, shall bo doterminod 
on tho nature of such Yogas(c). 

Notes. 

(а) That is the Navamsa of Makar or Kumbha. 

(б) I£ the Navamsa of Cancer should begin to rise 
and if the Moon should occupy the seventh house from tho 
rising sign* 

(c) For instance, Yogas relating to the birth of chil¬ 
dren with extra or defective organs, are to bo taken to refer 
ns much to the time of birth as to the time of conception. 
As regards such Yogas as those relating to the miscarriage 
of pregnancy and the like, they are to be taken to refer to 
the time of conception alone* 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



39 


3.] BBIHAT JlT k*L 

CHAPTER V. 

On Matters connected with Birth time. 

1. If, at the time of birth of a ohild the rising sign be 
not aspeoted by the Moon, the father will not be near when 
the child is born—and if -in such a case, the Snn should 
occupy the 9th or the 8th house, the father would be in a 
foreign country if the house be a movable sign, in his own 
country if the house be a fixed sign, and would be return* 
iog to his country if the honse be a common sign. 

2. If, at the time of birth, Saturn be in the rising 
sign or Mars in the setting sign, or the Moon between(a) 
Mercury and Venus, the father will not be near. 

* Notes. 

(a). Whether Mercury and Venus occupy the signs 
on both sides of the Moon or occupy the same sign as the 
Moon. 

3. If, at the time of birth, the Moon be in the Drok- 
kana of Mars(a) and if benefio planets be in the 2nd and 11th 
houses from the rising sign, the issue will be a serpent. If 
the sign(b) of a malefic planet be the ascendant sign, and if 
the Drekkana of Mars should then be rising, the issue wil 
be a child;bom with a serpent coiled round its body. 

' Notes- 

(а) . These Drekkanas of Mars are—the 1st Drekkana 
of Aries, the 2nd of Cancer, the 3rd of Leo, the 1st of 
Scorpio, the 2nd of Sagittari, and the 3rd of Pisces. 

(б) . Aries, Cancer when it is waning Moon, Loo and 
Scorpio. 

4. If, at the time of birth the Sun be in a quadruped 

sign and the other planets be all powerful and in the com 
mon signs, t he issue will be twins. 6 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



pWHAT J4T4SA. 


♦0 


toff. 5 r 


5. If ? at tbp time of birth, 4> r * e 3* I*GQ pr Tpurps t}P 
the risiifg sign, and if Saturn or Ifars bo ip sppty pign^ the 
^ssue will be a child born with the urabilipal pord twined 
round tljQ pert of l)o(|y judioafcqd by tjie fifiipg Nay$msa(p). 

Notes. 

(a). If the Npyamsa of Aries be ffte rising Neyajqsp 
at the time* thou round the head ; if it be that of TaprpS| 
then round the face and so op, following divisions of 
the body referred fo Jn Stansa 4, Cfmptpr I. 

(5. If Jupiter at the tirpe of birth fpil tp psppct botlj 
the ascendant sign and the Moon (a) ortho Moon when ip 
popjupptipp with thp Sun; or the Mopa be in conjunction 
with the Siin when he is accompanied by $ malefic planet} 
fhe issue will be an illegitimate child* 

Notes. 

(a). If Jupiter aspect either the onp or tj*e other thp 
phild will not be legitimate. 

According tp Yavanes.wara, jf either the ascendant 
Navamsa or the Navamsa occupied by the Moon be that of 
Jupiter, the child yrili not |je illegitimate. 

According to Gprga, if the Moon should pecupy a sigp 
of Jupiter, or if she be in oonjppptjon with Jupiter in any 
ofher sign, or if the Moon be in the Drekkana or Navamsa 
of Jupiter, the child will not |>e illegitimate, 

7. If, at the time of birth, two malefic planejjs(a) occupy 
one of the malefic sign(i), and if such sign be the 5th, 7tlj 
or 9th hopse from the Sun, the fathep pf the child will be in 
custody at the tjme. If the Sun occupy a movable sign, the 
father will be so in foreign )ands; if he occupy a fixed sig^ 
the father will be in custody in his own country, and if hp 
pocupy a common sign, the father will be so on Jus w$y tq 
native country. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 





t!H. 5 ] 


tsiBAT JATAKA. 


41 


Notes: 

(a) . Mars ctnd Saturn. 

(b) A ries, tied, Scorpio, Capricorn, Acjdaride, Cancer 
wHefi it is wading Moon, an'cl Gemini and Virgo when 
Mef-cury is in conjunction witii malefic planets. 

fi. If the Moon be full ancl in Cancer,' if Mercury be 
in tbb rising sign and Jupiter in the 4th house, the birth 
will occur in a boat. Again; if the watery signs begin to 
rise add if the Mood he in the 7 th house, then too the birth 
will ocbur in a borft. 

If a watery sign begin to rise, the birth will Certain¬ 
ly oficdr on the banks of waters, if (i) the Moon be also in 
a watery sign, or (2) if the Mood be full and aspect the ris¬ 
ing sign; or (8) if the Mood be in the 10th or 4th house or 
in Lagna . OtAfJ* 

Id. If the Moon occupy the rising sign and if Saturn 
occupy the l2th hodse and be dspected by a malefic planet, 
tbe birth will occur in a prison. Again, if either Scorpio or 
Cancer begin to rise and be occupied by Saturn andaspected 
by the Moon, the birth will occur in a ditch. 

11. If a watery sign begin to rise and if Saturn oocupy 
it and be aspected by Mercury, tbe San, or the Moon, the 
birth will occur respectively in a pleasure house, a temple 
or sterile ground. 

12. If a biped sign be rising, and if Saturn oocupy it 
and be aspected by Mars, the birth will be in orematicn 
ground ; if aspected by Venus and the Moon, the birth will 
occur in some beautiful and agreeable spot; if aspected by 
Jupiter, then in’ the Agnibotra Sala(a) ; if aspected by tbe 
Sun, then in tbe King’s palace or a temple or a oow shed 
and if aspeoted by Mercury the birth will occur iu on artist’s 
working room. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



43 . 


SIUHAT JAMBA.- 


[CHi 5«, 


Notes. 

(a). A place 'where the sacred fire is kept and 
worshipped. 

13. The birth will occnr In plaoes(a) represented by the 
rising sign or Navamsa, whichever is powerfal. If snch sign 
or Navamsa be a movable one, the birth will occnr in roads ; 
f fixed, then, within a building( b). If the rising Navamsa 
be a Vargottama one, the house will be the mother’s own 
property. ; A l. w? $a . 

Notes. 

(a). These places are those referred to in Stanza 5, 
Chapter I. We will give here the several places appro¬ 
priate to the several signs of the Zodiac. 


Mesha represents the abodes £(caves) of tlio sheep, 
mountains, the residence j[of an army, a fire place, metal 
mines and mines where precious stones aro found. 


Virshbha represents forests, bottom of hills, places , 
frequented by the elephants and cattle^and dwelling places 
of the farmer. 



Mithuna represents places frequented by women learned 
in muaio and painting for purpose of either play or to carry 
love messages to lovers. 



Kataka represents rice fields, tanks, sand banks and 
places frequented by the nymphs.. 


4 


Simha represents forests, inaccessible places, caves, 
mountains covered with forests and places frequented by 
forestmen. 



Kenya represents places overgrown with grass 
women’s sleeping apartments, and female schools. 


^ 4 ^ Tula represents customs houses, middle streets, bazars, 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBIHAT JATAKA. 


t!U. 5.] 


43 


at 

* 


roads leading to towns, market places, high greund and 
places where crops grow. 

Yrisohika represents caves, fortified towns, ditches, 
places where there are poisonous stones, and hills and snake 
holes and scorpion holes. 

Dhsnos represents good and even places Where there 
arc horses or cavalry men or armed men, places of sacri¬ 
ficial fire coremonies or whore vehicles are kept. 

Makara represents rivers, gardens, forests, tanks, water 
banks and ditches. 


Kumbha represents places frequented by birds, by 
women, by dealers in liquor or by gamblers. ■ 

Meena represents temples, places frequented by the 
Brahmins, holy waters, rivers and seas. 

N , (&)• If both fixed and movable, the birth would occur 

'in the outer verandah of the house. 

14. If, at the time of birth, Mars and Saturn occupy 
single sign, and if the Sun or the Moon (a) occupy the 5th 
or the 9th bouse from them, the ohild will be deserted by 
its mother; but if the Sun or the Moon be aspected by 
Jupiter, the child though abandoned by its mother will 
live long and in comfort. 

Notes. 


(a). If the Moon occupy the setting sign according to 
some other reading. 

* 15. If a malefic planet (a) aspect the Moon in the 

rising sign, Mars occupying the 7th house, or if Mars and 
Saturn occupy the 11th house from the Moon when in the 
rising sign, the child deserted by its mother will die. If 
the Moon be also aspected by a powerful benefic planet(h), 
the deserted child will fall into the Lands of the 
class of men represented by the aspecting benefic planet 


Digitized by t^ooQle 



44 tfRIffAT iATAKA. [CH- 9. 

arid will live; If tie aspecting malefic planet be powerful,' 
the deserted child Will fall into th‘e hands* 6 f others’arid 
will perish; 

Notes.’ 

(a). Saturn or Mars. 

(5). if Jupiter aspect the i/tooh } none of tlVese evils 
will befall the child. 

16. If a paternal plriuet be powerful, £he birti will occur 
ih the father 1 * house if a maternal planet be powerful, th6 
birth will occur in the mother’s house / if three benefit 
planets be powerful,’ the birth will occur at the foot of walls 
or trees ; and if three planefd occupying a single sign fail to’ 
Aspect the Lagna and the Moon, the birth will occur in* 
foiesl 

17. If the Moon occupy the Navalm&a of Saturn or 
the 4th house (u) from itn gfria, or if she be aspeefed by 
Saturn, or if she occupy a watery Navamsa(6) Or the same 
house as Saturn, the birth will occur in a dalrk spot(c). If 
three or more planets be in their Neecha signs(d), the birth 
will oesur on the bare ground (e). The birth will follow 
the manner in which the rising sign reaches the horizon (f). 
If malefic planets occupy the 4th or 7th house, the mother 
will suffer much fiorii travail ( g ). 

Notes. 

(а) . Yavanachariar uses the word Kendra , meaning 
Ilia 1st, 4tli, 7tli and 10th houses- 

(б) . Water Navamaas are those of Cancer and Pisces. 

(c). If the sun be powerful and be aspected by Mars, 
there will be no darkness¬ 
es Saravali has the word, “ Neecha Samethe, » that is, 
if the Moon be in her Neecha sign, viz, Scorpio. 

(e). On ground, covered with straw according to 
Commentator- 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



NSIH.fT JATAKA. 


pa. 6 ] 


4 $ 


(f). That is, if the sign be one that rise? with its 
piead, then the head of the clijild will appear first; if the 
sign be ppo that with its .tail, tl>e leg of the child 

frill appear first: and if it be one that rises with both its 
Piead and as sign Pisces, the h$nds will appear first. 


According to certain Commenlatprs this partpf the 
jtext is interpreted as fallpws ! If the lord of the risipg 
Sign be in his direct course, the birth will be a natural 
,one } and jf in lfis rotrogade motion, the birth will be an ir¬ 
regular one. This meaning has the support of Manittha. 

(?)• Or if malefic planets occupy the Bame sign os thp 
Moon, the mother will suffer frpm jtrayajl. 


18. The oil shall be determined from the Moon(o),the 
.wick from the rising sign(A) ; the fixed or other nature of 
the lamp shall bp determined from the sign occupied by 
the Sun(c). The entrance to the room will be in the 

direction of the powerful planet occupying a Kendra(d) or 
in that of the most powerful planet. 

Notes. 

(a). That is, if the,Moon occupy the beginning of a 
pign, the oil of the lamp in the delivery room will be fall; 
if the Moon occupy the middle sign, the oil will be one-half, 
and if the Moon occupy the end of a sign, there will be no 
pil in the lamp; in other words, the quantity of oil varies 
with the position of the Moon in the sign occupied by her. 

According to Sarayali, if the Moon be full the oil will 
fie full and the quantity of the oil varies with the ijjun>}ped 
portion of the Moon's disc. Batta Utpnla, the Comment ed¬ 
itor, objects to this view, for he says that if suoh were the 
pase, children born on new-moon days should always ft? 
fiofu in the d$rk—-this cannot be. 


Digitized by Tooele 



46 


BBIHAT JATAKA.' 


[oh. A 


(1). That Is, if the beginning of a sign begin to rise; 
the wick will be long and unburat;if the middle of the 
sign begin to rise, the wiok will be half burnt; and if the 
end of the sign begin to rise, the wick will be nearly 
wholly bnrnt. In other words, the length of the wick varies 
with the position of the point of the rising sign in oontaot 
with the horizon. 

The wick is of the color of the rising sign. 

(o). That is, if the sign occupied by the Sun be a fixed 
one, the lamp will be fixed in some place; if movable, the 
lamp will be earned by some body in the hand ; and if both 
fixed and movable the lamp will be a swinging lamp. The 
Commentator adds that the lamp will be in the direction 
assigned to the signs occupied by the Bun. According to 
somo the lamp will be in the direction of the sign (out of 
12 equal parts into which the room may be divided) occu¬ 
pied by the Sun. This latter division evidently refers to 
the division referred to in the Introduction in connection 
with Horary Astrology: 

According to others again dividing the 24 hours of day 
and night into 8 equal parts of 3 hours each, beginning from 
sun-rise, the lamp will be in the East, S. East, South, &c., 
according as the time of birth falls in the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, &c., 
parts of the division* 

(d) If there are no planets in the Kendras, the en¬ 
trance will be in the direction of the Lagna according to 
Swalpa Jafcaka. 

19. If Saturn be powerful, the birth will occur in a 
house which, having become old, has been rebuilt. If Mars 
be powerful, the birth will occur in a house partly burnt; 
if the Moon be powerful, then, in a newly built honso; if 
tho Sun be powerful, the birth will occur in a house builh 
of wood but weak; if Mercury be powerful then in a house 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKi. 


47 


CH. 5.J 


built by several builders; if Venus be powerful, 
then in a beautiful new house adorned with pictures; and 
if Jupiter be powerful, the birth will occur in a strong 
house. 


Notes. 

According to Saravali, if the Sun occupy the sign occu¬ 
pied by the most powerful planet os given in the text, tho 
delivery will occur in the room set apart for the worship 
of the Devas; if the Moou occupy the sign occupied by the 
most powerful planet, the birth will cocur in the bath or 
water room ; if Mars, then in the kitchen or the Aghihotra 
Sala ; if Mercury, in the bed room ; if Jupiter, in the trea~ 
sure room; if Venus, then in the play ground; and if 
Saturn, the birth will occur in the place where sweepings 
are deposited. 

The Commentator adds if there be three or more planets 
in the three signs beginning from that occupied by the most 
powerful planet, there will be houses on the eastern side ; 
if in the next throe signs, there will be houses on the south* 
era side; if in the next three, there will be houses on tbe 
western side; and if in the last three, there will be houses 
on the northern side. 

Again, according to Laghu Jatnka, if Jupiter at the 
same time be in the 10th house from tbe ascendant and in his 
exaltation sign—having passed over the exaltation degree, 
the birth will occur in a two storied house ; if he be under 
the exaltation degree, the birth will occur in a three 
storied house, and if in the exaltation degree, then in a 
four storied house. 

Again, if Sign Sagittari he powerful, tbe birth will 
occur in a house consisting of 3 inner verandahs ; if Jupi¬ 
ter occupy the 10th house from the ascendant or one of the 

7 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



/ 


48 BEIHAT JATAKA. [CBT. 5. 

signs Gemini, Virgo and Pisces, the house will be one with 
two inner verandahs. 

20. If either the ascendant sign, or the asoendnnt 
Navamsa, (whichever is powerful) be that of Aries, Cancer, 
Libra, Scorpio, or Aquarius, the delivery room will be in 
the eastern portion of the house ; if it be that of Sagittari, 
Pisces, Gemini or Virgo, then in the northern portion of the 
bouse , if it be that of Taurus, then in the western portion ; 
and if it be that of Capricorn or Leo, the delivery room 
will be in the southern portion of the house. 

21. If the rising sign be Aries or Taurus, the bed of 
the woman in labor will be in the eastern portion of the 
room ; if the rising sign be Gemini, it will be in the south* 
eastern portiou; if Cancer or Leo, then in the southern 
portion; and if Virgo, then in the south-western portion* 
if Libra or Scorpio, then in the western portion; and if 
Sagittari, then in the north-western portion : if Capricorn 
or Aquarius be the rising sign, the bed will be in the norths 
ern portion of the room, and if Pisces be the rising sign, it 
will be in the north-eastern portion of the room. The 
same rule applies as regards the place in the bed or cot 
where the womau might lie. As regards the cot, 

its two front legs occupy t|ie quarters assigned to the 
12th and 3rd houses from the ascendant and its two hiud 
legs occupy the quarters aligned to the 6th and 9th 
houses.(a). 

Nqtes. 

(a) In other words the i 2th and 3rd houses represent 
the fore legs ; the 9th and 6th houses represent the hind 
legs; the 3rd and 6th houses represent the two right legs, 
and the 12th and 9th houses represent the two left legs. 
Also the rising sign and the 2nd house represent the head 
of the cob the 4th and 5 th houses represent the right side ; 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



brihat jataka. 


49 


CH. 5] 

the 7th and 8th houses represent the part between the 
two hind legs, and the 10th and 11th houses represent tho 
left side. Now whatever portion of the cot may be repre¬ 
sented by the common signs, there the cot will be bent 
down a little, and this will not be the case if snch sign is 
either occupied or aspected by its lord or by a benefic 
planet. Again, there will be defects in those parts of the 
Cot which are represented by signs occupied by malefio 
planets, and this will not be the case if such malefio planets 
be in their exaltation signs, in their Moola Trikona signs, 
in friendly signs or in their own houses. 

22. The number of midwives will be tbo number of 
the planets between the rising sign and the Moon. Of 
these planets the number of those in the visible hemisphere 
will be the number of midwives outside the room, and the 
number of planets iu the invisible hemisphere will be the 
number of midwives inside the room. According to some 
this order is reversed.(a). 

Notes. 

(a) That is, of the planets between the Lagna and the 
Moon, the number in the visible hemisphere is the number 
of midwives within the room, and the number of planets ia 
the invisible hemisphere will be the number of midwives 
outside the room. In this view Varaha Mihira does not 
concur, for it is opposed to his Swalpa Jataka. 

Again, if benefio planets occupy the signs from 
Lagna to the Moon, the midwives will all be beautiful 
women, well dressed and adorned ; if malefic planets occupy 
the signs, the women will be dirty, ugly and with no orna¬ 
ments. 

Again, if any of the planets between the Lagna and tho 
Moon be in their exaltation signs or retrograde in motion, 
the number given by them shall be trebled. But if they be 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 


fiBIHAT JATAtA. 


bO 


[Cfi. &4 


In their own signs, Navamsas or Drekkanas, &c., the number 
given by the several planets shall be doubled* 

23. The structure aud other peculiarities^) of the 
body shall be determined from the lord of the rising Navom- 
sa or from the most powerful plauet ) and the color(6) of 
the body shall be determined from the (Lord of.the)Navaffi- 
sa occupied by the Moon ; and the size of the several parts 
of the body will follow the signs representing them, begin- 
ing from the rising sign which represents the head'c). 

Notes. 

(а) These are given in stanzas from 8 to 11 ini 
Chapter II. 

The Commentator adds that if the sign represented by 
the rising Navainsa be powerful, then the physical peculiari¬ 
ties shall he determined from the lord of such Navamsa ; 
if not they shall be determined from the most powerful 
planet. 

(б) This is given in stanza 4, Chapter II. According to 
some, the color must be determined from the Bign occupied 
by the Moon, vide stanza 20, Chapter I. To this the Com¬ 
mentator objects. For he says that there are no people of 
the color of the parrot. In determining the color, the country, 
the climate, occupation • and the like shall be taken into 
acccunt. 

(e) The division of body referred to here is the same 
as that referred to in Stanza 4, Chapter I, with this differ¬ 
ence that while the latter begius from sign Aries, the for¬ 
mer begins from the rising Bign. The divisions are as fol¬ 
lows : 

The rising sign represents the head ,* the 2nd house 
represents the face ; the 3rd, the breast; the 4th, the heart ; 
the 5th, the belly ; the Gth, tbe hip / the 7th, the lower 
abdomen ,* the 8th, the genital organ ; the 9th, the two 
thighs ) the 10th, the two knees; the 11th, the two shanks 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



on. 8.] 


3RIHAT JATAKA. 


51 


And the l2th*ttiC two feet. Now in stanza 19 of Chapter 
I, the relative magnitudes of the several signs of the Zodiao 
are given as follows i 

* J Aries..;.. ***20—I*isce$. 

* I Taurus..;*...24—Aquarius* 

** (Gemini.**28—Capricorn* 

* ( Cancer.32—Sagittari. 

r fLeo.;;.36—Scorpio. 

(.Virgo.........40—Libra- 

Of these the 4 signs referred to in division A are knowii 
as short signs. The 4 of division B are known as signs of 
middle length and the 4 of division G are known as long 
signs. So that that part of the body will be long or short 
according as the sign representing it is long or short. 
If the lord of a short sign occupy a long sign, or if the lord 
of a long sign occupy a short sign, the size of the part of 
body represented will be of -middle length* If several 
planets occupy a sign, tlie most powerful of them shall be 
taken into account, and if no planets occupy a sign, the size 
of the part of body will simply follow that of the sign, 

24. The three-fold divisions of the fcodj' beginning 
from the head, from the neck and from the lower abdomen, 
according as the rising Drekkana is the first, the second or 
the third, are as follows: 


The twelve 
Houses. 

Part of body represented when the rising 
Drekkana is 

The first. 

The second. 

' 

The third. 


Tlie rising 
sign. 

Head. 

Neck. 

Lower abdomen. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 














52 


BBIHAT JATAKA. 


[OH, 5, 


2nd house... 

Right eye ... 

Right arm 

Genital organ. 

12 th 

„ ... 

Left eye 

Left arm 

Anus. 

?rd 

» ••• 

Right ear ... 

Right hand ... 

Right testicle. 

util 

*, ••• 

heft oar 

Left hand 

Left testicle* 

4th 

„ 

Right nostril. 

Right side 

Right thigh* 

10 th 


Left nostril... 

Left side 

Left thigh* 

5th 

n 

Right temple. 

Right breast 

Right knee. 

9th 

i) •• • 

Left temple... 

Left breast ... 

Left knee. 

6th 

» ••• 

Right cheek... 

Right belly ... 

Right ankle. 

8th 

>9 ... 

Left cheek... 

Left belly 

Left ankle. 

7th 

,, ... 

Mouth 

The navel 

The feet. 


25. Wounds will occur in those parts of body the signs 
representing which are occupied by malefic planets; but if 
such sigus be occupied or aspected by benefio planets, moles 
will appear in those parts ; if such malefic or benefio planets 
be in their own signs or Navamsas or in fixed signs or fixed 
Navamsas, the wound or the mole will exist from birth; 
otherwise they will appear at a future time(a). As regards 
wounds, if the planet causing it be Saturn, the wound will 
be caused by a stone or by the wind; if Mars, then by fire 
or weapon or by poison; if (malefic) Mercury, it will be 
caused by earth $ if the Sun, then by wood or by quadru¬ 
peds; if the (waning) Moon, then by horned animals or by 
water animals. There will be no wound in those parts of the 
body which are represented by signs occupied by the bene¬ 
fio planets(b). 


Notes. 

{a) That is, iu the dasa or planetary periods of the 
several planets. 

( b ) By Jupiter, Venus, (benefic) Mercury and wax¬ 
ing Moon. 

For the purposes of this stanza the division of body is 
that referred to in stanza 24* 

26* If three planets, whether malefic or benefio occupy 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT J AT AKA. 


63 


ce. 6.J 

a single sign, a wound or a mole will appear without fail in 
the parts of body represented by the sign.(a) Again iri the 
division(6) of the body into twelve parts beginning from the 
head (which the Lagna represents) if a malefic planet oo- 
cnpy the sixth house a wound will appear(c) (in the hip); 
bat if the malefic planet be aspected by a beuefic planet, 
both a dark and a white mole will appear; but if beuefio 
planets OGcupy the sixth house, there will only appear a 
crowded growth of hair. 


NOTES. 

(а) The division of body referred to is that given in 
stanza 24. 

(б) The division referred to is that given in Note (c) 
to stanza 23* 

(c) In the dasa period of the most powerful planet. 
Also, if the planet occupying the (Jth house be in bis own 
sign or Navamsa or in a fixed sign or Nayapasa, the wound 
or the mole will exist from birth* 


CHAPTER VI. 

On ISalarishta or Earl? Death. 

1. If the birth should occur in the @andhyakala(a) 
£the twilight hours) when th e lunar Qora (6)should be rising 
find when malefic planets occupy the last Navamsas of 
signs, the child would die soqu after birth. Again, if at 
the time of birth, the Moon and three malefio planets occu¬ 
py the four gendras, one ^ each, then also the child would 
die. 


Jfotes. 

(a). Sandhynk&la ; This is defined by the author in 
his Brihat Samhita, stanza 1, ch. 30 ; That period which 
precedes the moment when the Sun has just half risen and 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA. 


54 


[oH» 6p 


that which succeeds the moment when the Sun has just 
half set, during which the stars are invisible, is known as 
Sandhyukala or twilight period. 

(b) In the odd signs, the second halves, and in the 
even signs the first halves are known as lunar Horas. 

2. If either sign Cancer or sign Scorpio should rise at 
the time of birth and if malefic planers occupy the east* 
pm half of the Zodiac while the bepofic planets occupy 
tho western lmlf(a), the child would die immediately after 
birth. Again, if malefic planets occupy the 12th and 2nd 
houses or the 6th and 8th bouses from the rising sign, the 
/child would die, 


Notes, 

r 

i 

(a). The plane of meridian divides the Zodiac into 
two equal halves known as the Eastern and Western 
halves; so that if the 10° of Cancer, for instance, should be 
rising at the time, the Eastern half would roughly comprise 
tho portion of the Zodiao from the 10° of Aries to the 10° 
of ; apd the 'VjTesbern half would comprise the 

portion of the Zodiac from the ip° pf Libra to the 10° of 
Aries. 

( l ). According to certain Commentators, the two 
yogas are taken together and made to form a single yoga. 
In other words, the;child would die under the first yoga 
only if malefic planets occupy tho 2nd, the 12th, the 6th 
pad the 8th houses. According tp Gprga there will be 
death in each of the following four yogas : (1) Malefic planets 
occupying tj)ji^&th aud the 12th houses ; (2) the 8th and 2nd 
houses;(3) the 12th and 2nd hopses; (4) the 8th and 6th 
houses. 

3. If the rising sign, the sottiug sign end the sign 
^occupied by the Mouu be each occupied by a pialefip planet 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA* 


55 


OH. 6%] 


and if the Moon be not aspected by benefio planets, the 
child will die immediately after birth. 

4* If the waning Moon occupy the 12th house from 
the ascendant* if the malefic planets occupy the rising sign 
and the 8th house* and if beoefic planets do not occupy the 
Kendras* the child will die immediately after birth. 

6* If the Moon attended by a malefic planet occupy 
the rising sign or the 7th* 8th or 12th housoi and if benefio 
planets do not occupy the Kendras* the child will die soon 
after birth* 

6* If* when the Moon occupies the 6th or the 8th 
house from tho ascendant* a malefic planet aspect the same 
the child will die soon after birth ; if a benefic planet alone 
aspect it, the child will die after 8 years * and if both a be¬ 
nefic and a malefic planet aspect the Moon* the child will 
die 4 years after birtb(a) * but if a benefio planet (occupy¬ 
ing the 6th or the 8th house) be aspected by powerful male¬ 
fic planets(&), or if the lord of the rising sign occupy the 7th 
house and be defeated in planetary fight (conjunction) by 
a malefic planet(c)* tho child will die a month after birth* 

Notes. 

(a). In connection with this* Tavaneswara says : If 
the 6th or the 8th house occupied by the Moon be the 
house of a benefio planet* or if the Moon be accompanied 
by a benefio planet* even though he may be in a malefic sign 
the child will not die. Mandavya says: If the birth; 
occur by day in the dark half or by night in the bright 
half of the month* there will be no deaths even if the Moon 
ocoupy the 6th or the 8th house and be aspected by both 
malefic and benefic planets* , . 

(5). In the absence of benefio planets aspecting the 
Moon* adds_tbe Commentator* Swalpa Jataka has the 
following: 

8 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



56 BBIHiT JATAXA. [OH. 6. 

" By malefio planets or by planets retrograde in their 
motion*” 

(e). The planet that generally suffers defeat in con¬ 
junction, is the southern one, one of forbidding appear- 
auce, one of flickering light, one retrograde in motion or of 
small size, or in conjunction with the Sun, or which is of 
unusual appearance or without light or color. 

7. If the waning Moon occupy the rising sign and if 
malefio planets oocupy the 8thhouse and the Kendras, or if 
the Moon occupy the 4th, 7th or 8th house and be between 
malefio planets, the child will die* Again, if the Moon 
oocupy the rising sign and be between malefic planets and 
if malefic planets occupy the 7th and 8th houses and 
powerful benefic planets fail to aspeot the Moon (a), both the 
mother and the child will die. 

Notes. 

t 

(a). If they do aspect the Moon, the mother will 
escape and the child will die. 

8. If at the time of birth the Moon occupy the last 
Naramsa of a sign and not be aspected by benefic planets, 
or if malefic planets occupy the 5th and the 9th houses or 
if the Moon oocupy the rising sign and malefio planeta 
occupy the 7th house, the child will die soon after birth. 

9* If at the time of birth the eclipsed Moon occupy 
tho rising sign with a malefio planet(a) while Mars occupies 
the 8th house, both the mother and the infant will die. If 
instead of the Moon, the Sun(5) be in a similar position, 
such death will be caused by weapons. .Again, if either the 
Sun or the Moon occupy the rising sign and if malefio pla¬ 
nets occupy the 5th, 8th and 9th houses, the child will die, 
if either the Sun or the Moon be neither aspected nor ac¬ 
companied by powerful bonefic planets. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



•H. 6.] 


BBIHAT JATAKA. 


n 


Notes* 

(a) . That is Saturn. 

(b) . That is, if the eolipsed Sun oocupy the rising 
sign accompanied by a malefic planet (either Mercury or 
Saturn), while Mars occupies the 8th house. 

10. If at the time of birth, Saturn, the Sun, the 
Moon and Mars ocoupy respectively the 12th, Oth, 1st and 
the 8th houses, the child will die soon after birth if tho 
planets be not aspected by powerful Jupiter. 

Notes. 

To aspect all the four planets, Jupiter must oooupy 
the 5th house. If Jupiter should aspect only some of the 
four planets, or if he be weak though he might aspect all 
the four planets, the child will die. So that the .child 
will escape death only if powerful Jupiter aspect all tho 
four planets. 

11. If, at the time of birth, the Moon (a) accompanied 
by a malefic planet ocoupy the 5th, 7th, 9tb, 12th, 1st or 
8th house, and if Blie be neither aocompainied nor as¬ 
pected by powerful Venus, Mercury or Jupiter, the child 
will die soon after birth. 

Notes. 

(a). The Moon is the waning Moon nocording to Sa- 
ravali. 

12. The death will occur when the Moon comes eithor 
to the sign occupied by the powerful planet causing suoli 
death, or to the sign occupied by herself at tire time of 
birth or to tho rising sign at the time, provided the Moon 
is both powerful and aspocted by powerful malefic planets ,* 
and the Munis say ' that the period for suoh death is a 
year, (a) 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



58 


BBIHAT JATAKA. 


[oh. 6. 


Notes. 

(a). The M oon makes about 13 revolutions in the 
course of a year. Whenever tho Moon in the coarse of 
motion becomes powerful and is aspected by powerful 
malefio planets on reaching ‘one of the three places men¬ 
tioned in the text, the death will occur. 

Notea :—Tho Commentator now proceeds to describe a 
number of yogas which counteract the several Balarishta 
yogas given in the text. They are given below. 

1. If powerful Jupiter occupy the rising sign, 
there will be no early death. 

2. If the lord of the rising sign be powerful, be not 
aspeoted by malefio planets and be aspected by benefio pla¬ 
nets oconpying the Kendras, the child will live long. 

3. Even though the Moon should ocoupy the 8th 
house, if she should, at the same time, oooupy the Drek- 
kana of Jupiter, Mercury or Venus, there will be no early 
death. 

4* If the Moon be full, if she should ocoupy benefio 
signs, be between benefic planets and be aspected by Ve¬ 
nus, there will be no early death. 

5. If either Mercury, Venus or Jupiter be powerful and 
occupy a Kendra, there will be no early death even if he be 
accompanied by n malefic plant. 

0. Though the Moon ocoupy tho 6th house there will 
bo no early death if she ocoupy the Drekkana of Jupiter, 
Venus or Mercury. 

7. If the Moon be full and be between benefio planets, 
-t here will be no early death. 

8. If the Moon be full or if the birth ooour during 
the day whou it is wuning Moon, or during the night when 


Digitized by t^,ooQle 



OB. 7-1 BR1HAT JATAXA- 59 

it is waxing Moon, there will be no early death even if the 
Moon occupy the 6th or the 8tl£house. 

9. If the Moon be full andjbe aspected by Jupiter 
occupying a Kendra, there will be no early death. 

10. If Jupiter, the Moon, Yenus and Mercury occupy 
he houses, the Navamsas or the Drekkanas of benefic pla¬ 
nets, there will bo no early death. 

11. If either tho lord of tho house occupied by tho 
Moon or if a benefio palnet occupy a Kendra, there will be 
no early death. 

12. If malefic planets occupy benefic Vargas (divi¬ 
sion,) and be aspected by benefic planets, oocnpynig benefic 
Yargas, there will be no early death* 

13. If Balm occupy the 3rd, 6th or 11th house and be 
aspected by benefic planets, there will be no early death. 

14. If all the planets occupy the Sirodaya signs, there 
will be no early death. 

15. If at the time of birth, a benefic planet successful 
in planetary fight (conjunction) bo aspectod by another 
benefio planet, there will be no early death. 

16. If the full Moon be aspected by all the planets, 
there will be no early death. 


CHATTER VII. 

On Ayurdaya ok The Determination of the Length of Life 

1. According to Maya, Yayanacharya, Manittha and 
Parasara, the maximum number of the years of the Sun 
the Moon and planets are respectively 19, 25, 15, 12, 15, 21 
and 20 when the planets are in their exaltation degrees. 

Notes. 

In this chapter are given several methods for deter- 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



60 


BRIHA.T JATAKA. 


[oh. 7. 

mining the length of human and other animal life from the 
planetary positions at the time of birth. The author first 
proceeds to state what is known as Pindayurdaya. 

The years given by the Sun when in his exaltation 

degree is 19. 


#1 

11 

Moon 

99 

11 

„ 25 

99 

>1 

Mars 

19 

19 

„ 15 

99 

91 

Mercury 

91 

19 

» 12 

99 

19 

Jupiter 

!» 

>9 

it 15 

99 

91 

Venus 

91 

If 

„ 21 

11 

>1 

Saturn 

>9 

>9 

* 20 


The exaltation signs with the exaltatiou degrees of the 
several planets are given in stanza 13, Ch I. 

Before the length of life oan bo ascertained, the years 
given above have to be subjected to various reductions. 

. 2. If the planets are in their depression degrees, their 
years will be one-half of those stated above; if in any other 
places, the years shall be obtained by proportion(a). The 
number of years given by Lagna is the same as the number 
of Navamsas of the rising sign that may have risen above 
the horizon(h). According to some(c) the number of 
years given by Lagna is the number of signs between the 
first point of Aries and the Lagna(d). Again, if a planet 
be in an inimical sign, he loses a third of his period(e); if 
he be an Astangata(/J planet, he loses one-half; but no 
reduction need be made in the case of Mars ( g ) occupying an 
inimical sign, or in the case of Saturn and Yenns being As- 
tangata planets. 

. # Notes. 

(a). Suppose, for instance, the Sun to occupy the 2lst 
degree of Sagittavi. Required his years. The exaltation de¬ 
gree of the Sun is the 10th degree of Aries and his depress- 
sion degree is the 10th degree of Libra When in the 
latter degree the number of years of the Sun will be ono 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




BBIBAT JATAKA. 


61 


OH. 7 .] 

half of whatitisin tho former degree, t.e., fine-half of 19 or 9| 
years. From the 10th degree of Libra to the 10th degree 
of Aries is 180 degrees. So that every degree gives us 9j 
years. Now from the 10th degree of Libra to the 21st 
degree of Sagittari is 2 signs and 11 degrees t. e-, 60 -f 11 or 71 
degrees. 71 degrees give us 7lX years = 3 years, H 

* T Tt) 

months and 29 days. Adding this to 9i years, we get 13 
years, 5 months and 29 days. The years of the other pla¬ 
nets may be similarly ascertained. These years are subjeot 
to certain reductions as will be seen further on. 

(b). The author gives here what is known as Lagna- 
yurdaya, that is, the rising sign gives a number of years in 
the same way as the planets do. A sign of Zodiao consist¬ 
ing of nine Navamsas gives us 9 years.. So that if the 10th 
degree of Leo be rising, the number of years given by 
Lagna X 9 years = 8 years. 

(a). Some: Manittba and men of his school. y 

(d) . In other words each sign of the Zodiac gives a 
year ; so that if the 10th degree of Leo, the 5th sign from 
Aries, be rising, the number of years given by Lagna = 4+^9 
years = 4 years, 4 months. The Commentator adds that 
in the case of Lagnayurdaya, the rule given in note(fi) 
should be followed, if the lord of the rising Niivamsa be 
powerful, and that given in this note should be followed if 
the lord of the rising sign be powerful. 

(e) . Planetary period ascertained as per note(o). 

(/). A planet is said to be an Astangata one when 

lie disappears within a particular limit from the Sun, 
his light being then obscured by the light of the Sun. This 
limit varies with different planets. In direct course, dis¬ 
appearance and re-appearance take place as follows : 


Digitized by t^,ooQle 



62 


XBIH1T J1TAKA* 


t«U. 7. , 


M ar g when.'within'17 degrees from the Sun. 

+ _ *1 A. . . 


14 
12 
11 
10 

• 8 

15 
12 


i> 

n 

n 

i> 

n 

II 

9 * 


II 

»l 


II 

II 

II 

ll 

I* 


this is 


(Mercury 

v (^But when retrograde 

Jupiter .. 

. (Venus ••• ••• 

\ But i when retrograde 

Saturn . 

The Moon ••• ••• — -v 

(9)* The word liser l * n text is Vclktcl; 

nterpreted to mean Mars hy some and into « a planet of 
retrograde motion” by others. So that, r according to the 
latter,no reduction for being in an inimical sign need be made 
from his years if the planet be retrogradejn motion. In 
this view Varaha Mihira conours. But the other view has 
the support of Badarayana. 


s. If malefip planets occupy the J2th, Uth, 10th, 9tb, 
8tb, or 7th house from the risiug sign, a reduction in full, 
one of one-half, one-third^jone-fifth and one-sixth shall be 
made respectively in tbe years obtained. If the planets 
occupying tbe said houses be benefic ones, the redaction 
will only be one-half (a) of what was stated for <; each 
Bat if several planets occupy a single sign, tbe redaction 
shall be made for tbe most powerful one. This is according 
to Satyacharya.(6) 


Notes. 

(a). Where the amount of reduction was stated to be 
full in tho caso of a malefic planet, it is only one-lialf in the 
oase of a benoiic planet; whoro it was stated to ho one-half 
in the former oase, it is only one-fourth in tlielatter case, 
and so forth. 


Qi). In this view Varaha Mihira concurs. 

4. If a malefic planet occupy the rising sign, then 
multiply the total number of years already obtained by the 


Digitized by 


Google 




DHITfAT JATAKA* 


03 


«H. 7.] 


number of Navamsas between tbo first point of At^cs and 
the Lagna of the rising Navamsaand divide the product 
by 108. The quotient willtbe the number of years to be 
subtracted (a) from the total number of years already ob¬ 
tained^). But if the malefio planet be aspeoted by a bene- 
fic one, the amount of reduction will only be^ oue-half 
of what was stated above. 


Notes. 

(а) . The reduction is known as Krurodayaharana. 

(б) . According to some the number of years of reduc¬ 
tion is obtained by multiplying the total number of years 
already obtained by the number of Navamsas of the rising 
sign that have risen above the horizon and dividing the 
product by 108, the total number of Navamsas of the 
Zodiac* 

5. The maximum length of life of man and the ele¬ 
phant is 120 years and 5 days, that of the horse is 82 years, 
that of the ass and the camel is 25 years/that of the buffalo 
and the ox is 24 years, that of the dog ] (a) is 

/2 years, and that of the goat and the like(5) is 16 years.^ 

Notes. 

To find out the length of life of an animal. Make the calcu¬ 
lation as for a man and multiply the result by the maximum 
period of life of the particular animal and divide the pro¬ 
duct by 120 years and 5 days. The result will be the length 
of life of the animal required. 

(а) . Dog and animals with claws* 

(б) . Goat, the deer and the like. 

6. The length of life of a person bom when the last 
Navamsa of Piscos is rising, when Morcury has just passed 
25 minutes in sign Taurus and whon all tho other planets 
occupy their exaltation signs is the maximum period of 120 
years and 5 /lays 

0 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



64 


B BIHAT JATAKA* 


£«. 7, 


Notes. 


The horoscope referred to in the text is given below. 


Venus. 

Lagna. 

Sun. 

Moon. 

Mercury. 



Past Chakra. 

i 

Jupiter. 

Mars. 




Saturn. 



As all planets exceptingMercury are in their exaltation 
Bigns (and in their exaltation degrees as supposed by the 
Commentator) the years given by such planets are the maxi- 
mam years assigned to them. The maximum number of 
years ofMercury when in his exaltation degree, viz., the 15th 
degree of Virgo is 12, and when in his depression 
degree, viz., the 15th degree of Pisces, is 6. The re¬ 
maining 15 degrees of Pisces give ns 6 months. Sign Aries 
gives us a year. Now the first degree of Taurus gives 12 
days and therefore 25 minutes of the 1st degree give us 
25 = 5 days. So that the years of Meronry = 6 years + 6 
months + 1 year + 5 days = 7 years, 6 months and 5 days. 


Again, as the end of sign Pisces was rising, according 
to the Commentator the nine Navamsos of sign Pisces givo 
ns 9 years; bo that we have the following J 


The. Snn ..19 yrs. 

The Moon..25„ 

Mars' ...15 )) 

Mercury .. .7 yrs,6 ms. 5 ds. 


Jupiter ... 15 yrs- 

Venus 21 „ 

Saturn ... 20 „ 

Lagoa ... 9 ,, 


Now a reduction known as Chakrapataharana is to be 
wade from the years of Mars and Saturn, these two being 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 7 .] 


brihjlt j at aka. 


66 ' 


malefic planets, the former occupying the 11th house and 
the latter the 8th house from the rising sign.’JThe amount 
of reduction therefore is one-half in the case of Mars and 
one-fifth in the case of Saturn. Accordingly after making 
the reduction, the years of Mars will be 7? and those of 
Saturn will be 16. Reductions known as Satrukshetra- 
liarana, Astangata harana and Krurodaya harana have not to 
be made in this case* The lesalting years therefore are— 


The Sun 

•*• Ml 

O •/ 

Years. 

19 

Months. Days* 

••• ••• 

The Moon 

•«• ... 

25 

fil l%# 

Mars 

... ... 

7 

6 

Mercury 

• • • » . • 

7 

6 5 

Jupiter 

• . • • . • 

15 

•.. »*• 

Venus 

• * . • • • 

21 

••• 

Saturn 

... • .• 

16 

Ml ... 

Lagna 

... • • • 

9 

... 

Total length of life 

120 

6 

7. This Pindayurdaya 

method has also been treated 


of by Vishnugupta (a)> Devaswami and Siddhasena. Reject¬ 
ing the age of 8, the period of Balarishta or early death (6), 
the main fault in this Pindayurdaya is that iu no case it 
gives us years less than 20 (c). 


Notes. 

(а) . Vishnugupta is otherwise known as Channkya. 

(б) . To which none of the Ayurdaya rules apply. 

(c). The Commentator considers that this stanza is not 
tho author’s; the objection to Pindayurdaya raised in it ho 
meets as follows by proving that Pindayurdaya does give 
years below 20. He takes the following horoscope. The 
first Navamsa of Aquarius is the Lagna. The Sun, the Moon 
and Venus occupy their exaltation dcgi ocs; Mercury, Jupiter* 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 





BRIHAT J AT AKA* 


[OH. 7 . 


and Saturn occupy their depression degrees, and Mars occu¬ 
pies the 28th degree of sign Aquarius. 


Venus 

'Mertfiiry. 

Sun. 

Saturn. 

Moon. 

* «* ^ 

Mars. 

Lugua. 

Basi Chakra. 


Jupiter. 




• 



Now as the Sun, the Moon and Venus are in their exal¬ 
tation degrees, their years are respectively 18, 25 and 21; 
and as Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn occupy their depression 
degrees, their years are one-half of their maximum years, 
that is one-half of 12, 15 and 20 or 6,7J and 10 respectively. 
Now the 28th degree of Capricorn is the exaltation degree 
of Mars>and as he occupies the 28th degree of Aquarius, he 
is removed from the exaltation degree by exacjrty 80 degrees. 
His maximum number of years when in the 28tli degree 
of Capricorn being 15 ; 30 degrees or a sign gives us or 
year and 3 months. Subtracting this from 15 years we 
get 13 years and 9 months as tho yearn of Mars. As sign 
Aquarius was just rising Lagna gives us no years; so that 
at this stage the planetary years stand as follows : 


The Sun 19 years. 
The Moon 25 „ 

Venus 21 „ 


Mercury 6 years. 
Jupiter 7 years G ms. 
Saturn 10 „ 


and Mars 13 years 9 months. Now as Jupiter, a benefic planet 
occupies the 12th house from the rising sign, his years 
a (for a redaction of one-half of their length ; so that, after 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BnflUT J IT AKA. 


61 


c a. 7.] 

the redaction, he gives as only 3 years and 9 months. 
Again, as all the planets occupy friendly signs, no Batru- 
j£shetraharana need be made. Saturn being within 10 
degrees from the Sun is an Astangata planet and therefore 
his years suffer iT redirection of one half. So that after the. 
rwkietien- he gives us & years. Thus we have the follow¬ 
ing. 

The Sun lg years* Mercury 6 years. 

The Moon 25 ... Jupiter 3 ys. 9 ms. 

Venus 21 ... Saturn IO & years, 

Mars 13 years 9 months. 

Total 98^years 6 months. 

J'iow as Mars, a malefic planet* occupies the rising sign* 
the total number of Sflfyears and 6 months have to be sub¬ 
jected to a deduction known as Krurodaya harana. In 
other words the 108 Navamsas of the ecliptic represent the 
total number of years. Now there are 10 X 9 = 90 Na- 

vamsas between the first point of Aries and tho first point 
of Aquaria. The quantity of reduction therefore is X 98~ 
years and 6 months* Therefore the years remaining 
after the reduction = tVV * 93"years and 6 mouths = ](T 
years and ^months, the length of life required. This of 
course is less than 20 years. 

8. To the very yoga to which the maximum length of 
life has been assigned, certain astrologers (a) have ascribed 
the life of a king. There is an evident error in this. 
Another error is that persons (born under the yoga of a 
sovereign) are often fouud to live long and poor. 

Notes. 

(a.) Jiucli as Badarayana and Yavaneswara. 

The objection amounts to this : 

That the very yoga which, according to Pindayurdaya 
is said to give a person the maximum length otlife is const- 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT J AT AKA* 


6 $ 


['CH* 7 , 


dered by certain astrologers as Baja Toga. In either 
Case several planets cccupy their exaltation 6igns (vide 
stauza 1, Chapter XI.) The Commentator considers this 
stanza too, not as the author’s, the objection raised being 
an absurd one. For, it is wrong to suppose that a particular 
yoga cannot be both a yoga for long life and one for the 
life of a sovereign. The other objection raised in the text is 
evidently a frivolous one and ought to be proved before it 
can be met. 

9. According to Joevasarma the maximum number of 
years for each planet when in his exaltation sign and degree 
is one-seventh of the maximum length of human life—120 
years aud 5 days,—which is 1*7 years, 1 month, 22 days, and 
ghatikas. (a) la this view Jeevasarma stands alone and 
is not supported by other authorities. According to Satya- 
charya, the planetary years are the same as the number of 
Navamsas passed over by each planet(t). This view has the 
support of many authorities. 


Notes* 

(a.) Just as in Pindayurdaya, the several reductions are to 
be made and then the resulting length of life ascertained. 

(/>). Counting from the Navamsa of Aries immediately 
preceding ; so that no planet can give more than 12 years. 

10. According to Satyaoharya, convert the Sphuta or 
longitude of the plauot into minutes ; divide the nurnbor 
minutes by COO ; the quotient will represent the number of 
Navamsas passed over by tho planet from the first point of 
Aries. Divide this by i2, the remainder will give tho number 
of Navamsas from the Navamsa of Aries the number is 
also the number of years and fraction of a year for 
the planet- 

Notes. ' 

Suppose the longitude of the Sun to bo 115 degrees lg 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



• bbihat jataka. 


69 


CH. 7,] 

minutes. This converted Into minutes gives 6,913 minutes^ 
Now as a Navamsa contains 200 minutes the num_ 
ber of Navamsas passed over by the Sun from the 
first point of Aries = V™ = 34^. Dividing this 
by 12, we get as remainder 10^ Navamsas from the next 
preceding Navamsa of Aries. This then represents tli© 
years of the Sun which will be found to bo 10 years. 
6 montiis 23 days and 24 ghatikos ; and so on for each 
planet. 

11. Again, if any planet occupies its exaltation 
sign or is retrograde in its motion, the years assigned 
to it, shall be trebled ; and if the planet be in its Var- 
gottama or Navamsa or Swakshetra or Dnekkana, its 
years shall be doubled^ The above is a special feature 
in Satyacharyar^s Ayurdaya. In other respects, it resembles 
the Pindayurdaya—the several redaotlons(a) already refer¬ 
red to apply to the present case. 

Notesr 

(a). The redaction known as Krnrodaya harana 
does not apply to Satyaoharyar*s method. (Vide stanza 12), 

12. According £d Satyacharya the years, months, &c. 
for the Lagoa, the rising degree,are the same as the number 
of Navamsas passed over (a) (as in the case of the planets); 
but if the rising sign be powerful(ft), then, the number of 
signs passed over represents the years, months, &c,« The 
reduction known as Krurodayaharana does not apply to 
Satyaoharyar’s method. In the oase of the other reductions 
the years giyeu in the first stanza ought not to be employ¬ 
ed^). 


Notes. 

(a). Beginning from the next preceding Navamsa of 
Arie8< ' 


Digitized by 


Google 


J 



70 


lmiHAT JATAKA, 


[CH. 7 * 


( l ). As stated in stanza 19, Oh I, 

(c). That is the special years of each planet according 
to Satyacharya’s method ought to be subjected to the several 
reductions. 

18. Iu the matter of Ayurdaya, the method of Satya- 
Charya is the best. Objection is made to it cm the ground 
that the planatery years have to be multiplied several times(a) 
This is wrong; where any period has to be multiplod 
by several numbers, it will be sufficient if the period is 
multiplied by the largest number(i). 

Notes. 

(а) . Suppose Mercury to occupy sign Virgo which is 
bis exaltation sign as well as his house. 

It would seem that under stanza 11, Mercury’s years 
should first be trebled and then doubled. Is this to be 
done ? Again, suppose Mercury to occupy the last Navamsa 
of sign Virgo whioh is his Vargotama position. His years, 
it would appear, have to be doubled on that account.Already 
we found that for being in his house, his years had to 
be doubled. The question is whether the years of Mercury 
have to be doubled twice. Again, suppose Mercury while 
occupying Virgo, his exaltation sign, is also retrograde in 
his motion for which his years have to be trebled* Are his 
years then to be trebled twioe. No. 

(б) . If any period has to be doubled twioe or thrice, 
;t will be enough if it be doubled but once, and where the 
period has to be trebled twice or thrice, it will bo enough if it 
be trebled but once. Again, if any period has to be both 
doubled and trebled, it will be enough if it be only trebled 

14, The life of a person horn when sign Cancer is ris¬ 
ing, when Jupiter and the Moon occupy such rising sign, 
when Mercury and Venus opeupy the Kendras and the other 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 7 .] 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


71 


planets occupy the llth,6th and 8rd houses is not subject to 
ordinary calculation, but far exceeds the maximum period 
of normal human existence(c). 

Notes. 

(a). In other words, the ordinary ^yurdaya rules for 
ascertaining the length of a man’s life do not apply to the 
horoscope mentioned in the text. For further particulars 
vide Chapter IX. Notes. 

Notes :—It may be interesting to quote here a few horos¬ 
copes of the nature of the one referred to in the last stanza 
to which the ordinary Ayurdaya rules do not apply. These 
are mainly the horoscopes of eminent sages who are suppos¬ 
ed to live for several centuries. 

(1) . The rising sign is Leo and Jupiter occupies it, 
Venus occupies Cancer, Mercury the 2nd house Virgo, and 
the malefic planets occupy the Upachaya places, viz., the 
3rd, 6th, 10th, and 11th houses. A person born in the 
above yoga will live for 1,000 years. ' 

(2) . The Sun and Mars oocupy the 4th house from the 
ascendant; Saturn occupies the rising sign, Rahu the 12th 
house and the other planets the 8th house. A person born 
in the above Yoga will live for 2,000 years. 

(3) . The rising sign is Aries, and the Sun occupies it. 
Saturn occupies the 4th or the 9th house. Mars the 7th 
house, and powerful Moon the 12th house. A person born 
in the above yoga will live for 2,000 years by the power of 
drugs. 

(4) . The rising sign is Sagittari or Pisces, and Jupi¬ 
ter occupies it; sign Gemini is unoccupied and Venus occu¬ 
pies one of the Kendra houses. A person born in the above 
yoga will live for a great number of years by the power of 
drugs and will attain the position of Indra. 

10 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



n 


BftlHAT JATAKA. 


[OH. ? f 


(5) f If all the planets occupy either a single sign or 
the Trikona or the Kendra houses, a person born in the 
yoga will either die immediately after birth or live for a 
yuga by the power of nxantrat, 

6. If malefic planets do not occupy the Trikona houses, 
• benefic planets do not occupy the Kendra houses, and if the 

8th house be not occupied by a malefic planet, a person 
born in the yoga will become a Deva. 

7. The rising sign is Taurus and Venus occupies it. 
Jupiter occupies oue of the Kendra houses and the other 
planets occupy the 3rd, 6th and 11th houses. A person, 
born under the yoga will become a Peya after living for a 
great number of years by the power of drugs and mantras. 

8. The rising sign is Canoer; Saturn occupies sign 
Libra; Jupiter occupies Capricorn > and the Moon occupies 
Taurus. A person born under the yoga attains the position 
of Brahma after Hying a great many years by the strength 
of drugs and mantras. 

9. The rising sign is Canoer and Cancer is also the 
rising Navamsa; Jupiter occupies one of the Kendra houses * 
Mars the 7th house $ and Venus is in Simhasanamsa(a)« 
A person born in the above yoga will live long by the power 
of drugs* 

10. The rising Navamsa is the last Navamsa of sign 
Virgo and Mercury occupies it ; Jupiter occupies the 7th 
house and is in Gopuramsa or Saturn is in Mridvarasa.. 
A person born under the above yoga will live for an infi^ 
nito number of years* 

11. Venus is in Devalokamsa; Mars in one of the 
Kendra houses and Jupiter is also in one of the Kendra 
houses and is in Simhasanamsa. A person born in the 
above yoga will live for a countless number of years. 

(a). For an explanation of these Amsaa or planetary 
positions, yide the note at the end* 


k 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



cfc. 7*] 


fcfelHAt JATAKA* 


?3 

12. Venus occupies one of the Kendra houses and is 
in Vargottarna position and in Paravatamsa; Jupiter occu¬ 
pies one of the Kendra houses and is in Swargalokamsa; 
A person born in the above yoga will live for a countless 
number of years by the power of drugs* 

13. Jupiter occupies one of the Kendra houses, and is 
in Gopuratnsa; Venus occupies one of the Trikona houses 
Und is in Paravatamsa and the risiUg sign is Cancer; a 
person born in the above yoga will live for a yoga. 

14. The rising sign is CanCer and Jupiter occupies it 
Und is in the Navamsa of Ssgibtari and 2 or 8 planets 
occupy the Kendras. A person born in the above yoga 
will live long and attain the position of Brahma. 

15. Venus occupies the 3rd or 11th house and is in 
Gopura or other Amsas* and the rising Navamsa is Taurus 
of sign TauriUu A person born in the above yoga will live 
long and attain the position of Brahma* 

16. Venus occupies the rising sign $ Jupiter the 7th 
house; the Moon* sign Virgo, and the rising Navamsa is 
Aries of sign Sagittari. A person born in the above yoga 
will obtain salvation; 

17. Mercury occupies the 5th house and is in Gopura 
or other amsas; the rising sign is Aquarius and Jupiter 
occupies it. A person botn in the above yoga will attain 
the position of Brahma. 

18. Jupiter occupies one of the Kendra houses. Saturn 
Occupies the ilth house. The Sun occupies the 2nd house 

, Gulika (the higher apsis of a planet’s course) occupies the 
7th house and Mars occupies the 9th house* A person born 
in the above yoga will live for a yuga. 

19* Jupiter and Mercury are in the Trikoiia houses j 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



74 


BBIHAT JATAkA. 


[oh. 7 


the rising sign is Taurus and Mars oocupies it and the 
Moon is in Gopuramsa. A person born in the above yoga 
will live for 2,000 years. 

20. Jupiter oocupies one of the Kendra houses ; the 
rising sign is Cunoer, Mars occupies the 7th house and 
Saturn the 4th house; the time of birth is the light half 
of the month. If the birth of a person occurs in the above 
yoga and by day he will live for 10,000 years. 

21. Jupiter, Saturn, Mars and Venus occupy the Ken¬ 
dras and are mutually in Kendra positions to one another, 
or they all occupy the Trikona houses. A person born in 
either of the above yogas will live for 10,000 years. 

22. Benefic planets occupy the Kendras ; Malefic pla¬ 
nets occupy the 3rd, 6th, and 11th houses; the rising sign 
is Leo and Jupiter occupies it. A person born in the 
above yoga will live for 60,000 years. 

23. The rising sign js Capricorn and planets from 
Mars to the Sun occupy it excepting Jupiter who occupies 

the 3rd house. A person born in the above yoga will live 
for a Kalpa. 

24. The last Navamsa of sign Aries is the rising Na- 
vamsa and Jupiter or Venus occupies it; the Moon occu¬ 
pies the 5th Navamsa of Taurus or Sagittari or Mars is in 
Simhasannmsa. A person born in the above yoga will 
live for a countless number of years. 

25. The Suu and Mercury occupy fixed signs; the 
Moon occupies sign Taurus, and Venus sign Gemini; the 
rising sign is Cancer and Jupiter occupies it, or the rising 
sign is Libra and Saturn occupies it. A person born in the 
above yoga will become a Muni or a Itisln. 

23. The Moon is in Devalokamsa ; Mars is in Paravat- 
amsa; the Sun is in the rising sign and in Simhasanamsa 
A person born in the above yoga will become a Muni or a 
Bishi. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 


CH. 7] 


BBIH1T JlTlKA. 


75 


27. The Snn oocupios sign Aries ; Jupiter either the 
9th house or sign Cancer and the malefic planets occupy 
the 3rd, 6th, and llth houses. A person born in the above 
yoga will become a Muni. 


Ameas explained . 

In Chapter I we have referred to the six modes of di¬ 
vision of the Ecliptio known as Shadvarga. Certain writers 
have four more divisions known as Saptamamsa, Dasamsai 
Shodasamsa and Shashtyamsa . These ten divisions of the 
ecliptic are known as Dasavarga. 

Saptamamsa is division of a sign of the Zodiac into 7 
equal parts. The lords of the 7 parts of the odd signs are 
respectively the lords of the 7 signs of the Zodiac commen¬ 
cing from the odd sign ; and the lords of the 7 parts of the 
even signs are respectively the lords of the 7 signs of the 
Zodiac beginning from the 7th sign from the even sign. 

Dasamsa is division of a sign of the Zodiac into 10 

equal parts. The lords of the 10 parts of the odd Bigns are 
respectively the lords of the 10 signs of the Zodiac com¬ 
mencing from the odd sign, and the lords of the 10 parts of 
the even signs are respectively the lords of the 10 signs 
commencing from the 1 Obh sign from the even sign. 

Shodasamsa is division of a sign of the ecliptic into 16 
equal parts. The lords of the 1G parts of the odd signs 
are the lords of the 12 signs commercing from the odd sign 
together with Brahma, Vishnu, Rudra and Surya; the 
lords of the 16 parts of the even signs are the lords of the 
12 signs comraopcing from the even signs together with 
Snryo, Rudra, Vishnu and Brahma. 

Shashtyamsa is division of a sign of the ecliptic into 60 
equal parts. The 60 parts of the odd signs are those of 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



76 teBIHAT JATAKA* [OH. 8 


1. Ghora. 

21. Padma. 

41. Kalinasa. 

2. Bnkshasa. 

22. Lakshroi. 

42. Mukhya. 

8k Deva* 

28. Vageesa. 

43. Vamsakshaya* 

4. Knbora. 

24. Digarabara. 

44. Utpataka. 

6* llakshogana. 

25. Deva. 

45. Kala-rupa* 

6* Kinnara. 

20. Ardra. 

46. Soumya. 

7. Bhrashta. 

27. Kalinasa. 

47. Mridu. 

8. KulaghOa. 

28. Kshitiswara. 

48. Sositala. 

9. Garala. 

29. Kamalakara. 

49. Damshtr&karala* 

10. Agni. 

SO. Mandatmaja. 

50. Indumukha. 

11. Maya. 

81. Mrityii* 

51. Pravina. 

12. Pretapureesa.32. Kala. 

52. Kalagni. 

13. Apampafci. 

38. Davagni. 

5?. Dandayudha* 

14. Devaganesa. 

84. Ghora. 

f>4. Nirmala. 

15. Kala. 

85. Amaya. 

55. Subha* 

16. Ahi* 

80. Kan taka* 

56. Asubha. 

17. Amritamsa. 

87* Sudha* 

57. Atisitala. 

18. Chandra. 

38. Amrita* 

58. Sudha. 


19 Mridu* 89* Poornacbandra. 59. Payodhibhramana* 
20. Komala. 40. Vishapradigdha. 60. Indurekha. 

And tlie 60 parts of the even signs are the above in 
the inverse order, that is* beginning from Indurekha and 

ending in Ghora. 

Now a planet which occupies his particular house, Na- 
vamsa, Dwadasamsa, Trimsamsa, &o., is said to be in his 
Varga. A planet occupying two Vargas is said to be in 
Parijatamsa j if he occupies three Vargas, he is said to be in 
Uttamamsa j if four vargas, in Gopuramsa ; if five vargas 
in Simhanamsa; if six, in Paravatarasa ; if seven or eight, 
in Devalokamsa; if nine, in Airavatuim a } and if ten, in 
Vaiseshikamsa. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 8] 


BRIHAT JATAKAt ' 


77 


CHAPTER VIII. 

On Pianbtary Divisions and Sub-Divisions of Life 

Known as Dasas and Antardasas. 

1. Determine fir*t which of the following three is 

powerful^-the Rising Sign, the Sun and the Moon. His pe¬ 
riod comes first. Then follow the periods of tha planets 
occupying the Kendra houses! from such powerful rising 
sign or the Sun or the Moon* Then come the periods of 
the planets occupying the Panaphara houses from the same, 
and lastly come the periods of planets occupying the Apok- 
litna houses(a). If there be no planets in the Kendra or 
Panaphara or Apoklima houses! then the periods of the 
other planets come in the order stated. 

Notes. 

(a). The order in which come thb periods of the 
several planets occupying the Kendra or the Panaphara or 
the Apoklina houses is given in the following stanza. 

8. The lengths of the several planetary periods known 
as dasas are the same as those of the planets ns found iu 
the last chapter. Again, of the several planets occupying 
the Kendra or Panaphara or Apoklina houses, the dasa 
period of the most powerful planet comes first, then comes 
that of the planet next in power and so on ; but if the 
planets be of equal power, the dasa period of the planet 
whose period is the longest comes first.; and if the planets be 
of equal power and period, then the period of the planet 
which rises first(a) comes first. 

Notes. 

(a.) That is, reappears after its conjunction with the 
Sun according to Commentator. Taking stanzas 1 and 2 
together, we find that the dasa period of either Lagna or the 
Sun or the Moon, whichever is powerful, comes first. Then 
oome the periods of the planets occupying the Kendra house* 
in the order stated. Then the periods of the planets occupy¬ 
ing the Panaphara houses in the same order, aud lasts 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA. 


78 

those of the planets occupying the Apoklina houses in the 
same order. 

8. The period of the Antardasa(a) (sub-division of 
planetary period) of the planot'6) occupying the same 
house as the lord of the dasa period, is one-half of the 
antardasa period of such lord. The antardasa period of 
the planet occupying the 5th, or the 9th house from the lord 
of the dasa period, is one-third,that of the planet occupying 
the 7th house from the lord is one-seventh, and that of the 
planet occupying the 4th or the 8th house from the lord 
is one-fourth of the antardasa period of the lord. The 
antardasa periods of the Lugnu-dasa shall be determined in 
the same way. 

Notes. 

(a). Planetary divisions of life are known as dasa 
periods and planetary sub-divisions of life are known as the 
antardasa periods. 

( b .) The antardasa periods of a particular dasa period 
of a planet come in the order stated in the text, namely 
first comes the antardasa period of the planet itself, then 
that of the planet occupying the same house as the lord of 
the dasa period, then, that of the plauet occupying the 5th or 
9th house from the lord, then that of the planet occupying 
the 7th house from the lord, and lastly that of the planet 
occupying the 4th or the 8th house from such lord. If 
several planets occupy the same house as the lord of the 
dasa period, tlio lord of the Antardasa is the most powerful 
of them. Similarly, if several planets occupy the 5th and the 
9th houses or the 7th house or the 4th and 8th houses from 
the sign occupied by the lord of the dasa, the lord of the 
antardasa in each of the three cases is the most powerful 
plauet; so that the several antardasa periods are in the 
proportion of 1 -i (vide stanza 4.) If there be- 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBIHAT JATAKA. 


79 


OH .ft] 

no planets in any of these plaoes, the antardasa periods of 
the other planets alone should be taken. 

4. The fractions(a) should all be made to have a 
common denominator with different numerators. The 
dasa period should be divided by the sum of the numera* 
tors and the quotient when multiplied by the -several 
numerators will give the periods of the several antar- 
dosas. 

yfoi/68 

(o). That iB J, 4 , and J. , 

Suppose for instance there are planets in the severs^ 
places referred to in the last stanza excepting say, the 7th 
house from the sign^ occupied by the lord of the dasa. 

. The periods of the four antardasas—those of (1) the 
lord of the dasa; (2) the planet with it; (3) the planet 
occupying the 5th or the 9th house from it and (4) the 
planet occupying the 4th or tho 8th honse from it—are in 
the proportion of J : i : }: Reducing these to fractions 
with a common denominator, we get x $and in 

other words the antardasa periods are in the proportion of 
j2 : 6 : 4 :3. The sum of these numbers is 25 ; if therefore 
jhe dasa period be divided by 25 and the quotient multi* 
plied by 12, 6, 4 and 8, we shall obtain the periods of the 
four antardasas/ 

5. The dasa period(a) of the most powerful planet 
ooupying the exaltation degree of its exaltation sign is known 
a s Sampoorna {b') The dasd period of a weak planet occupy¬ 
ing the depression degree of its depression sign is known a s 
Rikta(c). The dasa period of a planet occupyng an 
inimical Navamsa and also the depression degree of its 
depression sign is knowns Anishta. 

Notes. 

(a). As well as the antardasa period in ; this and in tho 
next two oases mentioned in the text. - . 

11 


Digitized by t^ooQle 



80 


BR1HAT J AT AKA. 


[CIT. 8 

(b). The dasa,period of a planet ocouupying simply its 
exaltation sign and not very powerful is known as Puma. 

(c.) The dasa period of a weak planet occupying simply 
its depression sign is also known as Hilda (a,) 

6. The dasajperiod of a planet which quitting the ex¬ 
altation degree moves towards the depression sign is known as 
Avarohini ; while so moving, if the planet occupy a 
friendly or an exaltation Navamsa (20 his dasa period is 
known as Madhyama. Again the dasa period of a planet 
wbioh quitting the depression degree moves towards its 
exaltation sign is known as Arohini ; while.so moving, if 
the planet occupy an imitnical or a depression Navamsa, 
his dasa period is known as Adhama. 

(a). As well as the antardasa period according to the 
Commentator. 

b). Or his own Navamsa according to the Commenta- 
toT. Exaltation Navamsa is one which bears the name of 
the exaltation sign. 

7. The dasa period (a) of a planet which occupies a 
depression or an inimical Navamsa, when in a good posi¬ 
tion^) is known as Mi8raphala(c). The several names of 
the dasas indicate by their meaning the nature of the das a 
periods(d). We shall describe (in the course of this chap- 
ter)(e) the effects of the several planetry dasas. 

Notes. 

(a). As well as the antardasa period according to 
Commentator. 

* (b.) That is, when the planet occupies his own house, 
a friendly house or his Moolatrikona or exaltation house 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 8.] BBIHAT JATAKA. 81 

( 0 ). Similarly the dasa period of a planet which occu¬ 
pies an inimioal or depression sign and is in bis own N a 
vamasfl, in a friendly Navamsa or a Moolatrikona or exalta 
tion Navamsa, or if he occupies a Vargotama place, is also 
known as Misraphala. 

(i). E. g. The name Sampurna indicates vast pros¬ 
perity. Pooma indicates prosperity. Adhaina indicates 
misery or destruction and very little prosperity. Rikta 
indicates misery and poverty. And Misraphala indicates a 
mixture of both good and evil. 

( 0 ). From stanza 12 of this chapter. 

8. According as the rising Drekkana is the first, se¬ 
cond or third, the Lagna dasa is, known as Adhama, Mad- 
hyama or Uttama if the rising sign be a common sign; Utta- 
ma, Madhyama or Adhama if the rising Bi'gn be a movable 
sign ; and Adhama, Uttama or Madhyama if the rising sign 
be a fixed sign. 

Notes. 

In other words, if the rising sign be one of the common 
signs, Gemini, Virgo r Sagitteri and Pisces, the Lagna dasa 
is known as Adhama, if the rising: Drekkana be the 1st, 
Madhyama if it be the 2nd, and Uttama or Poojita if it be 
the 3rd. Again, if the rising sign be one of the movable 
signs, Aries, Cancer, Libra, and Caprioprn, .the Lagua dasa 
is known as Uttama if the rising Drekkana be the 1st, Mad¬ 
hyama if it be the 2nd, and Adhama if it be the 3rd. Lastly, 
if the rising sign be one of the fixed signs, Taurus, Leo, 
Scorpio, and Aqnarins, the Lagna dasa is known as Adhama 
or Asnbha if the rising Drekkana be the first, Uttama or 
Ishta if it be the 2nd, and Madhyama or Samaifit be the 
3rd. These names indicate, as already stated, the nature of 
the dasa period. E. g. Adhama indicates misery, Madhy¬ 
ama a mixture of both good and evil, and Uttama indicates 
(prosperity. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



89 


BBIH1T JATAKA. 


[CH. 8* 

9. The Naisargika (natural) dasas in the oase of all* 
creatures are those of the Moon, Mars, Meronry, Venus> 
Jnpiter, the Sun and the Saturn in the order stated, and 
their periods are respectively 1,2,9,20,18,20 & 50 years(a). 
If the Naisargika dasa period and the ordinary pla¬ 
netary dasa period happen to run together, such period (bp 
■will be a prosperous one. According to Yavaneswara, the 
closing period(c) is the Naisargika Lagna dasa and pro¬ 
duces prosperity. This is objected to by some. 

Notes. 

(o). In all 120 years. 

($). A similar remark applies to the Antardasa periods 
( (c). The period of life after 120 years. 

10. If the lord of the dasa period or one of his friend¬ 
ly planets ocoupy the Lagna(a), or if the Lagna belong to 
the Varga (division)(6) of the lord of the dasa period, or if 
a benefio planet ocoupy the Lagna, or if the lord of the dasa 
period occupy the 3rd, 6th, 10th or 11th house from the 
Lagna, such dasa period(e) will be a prosperous one (d)- 

Again, if the Moon that occupies (e) a sign friendly (/) 
to the lord of the dasa(<?) or the exaltation sign of the 
lord of the dasa or the 8rd, 6th, 10th, Uth, 6th, 9th or the 
'7th house (K) from the sign occupied by the lord of the dasa 
period, she will bring on prosperity; otherwise(t), she witf 
produce misery. 


Notes.: 

(a). Lagna: This is interpreted to mean the rising 
sign at the moment of the commencement of the dasa 
period; so that the hour of commencement of a dasa period 
must first be ascertained and a figure of the heavens drawn 
up forthe hour. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



bRIhaT jataxa.' 


83 


CH. 8] 

(b) . Varga: If, for instance, theLagnabe the sign, Bora, 
Drekana, Navamsa, Dwadasamsa or Trimsamsa of the* 
lord of dasa period. 

(c) . Or Antardasa period acoording to Commentator. 

(d) . If either the friendly planet or the benefic planet 
ooonpying the Lagna be an Atimitra planet to the lord of 
the'dasa period, such period will be a very prosperous one; 
if snoh benefic planet be an Atisatru]planet, the period will 
not be a prosperous one; but if the planet be a neutral one, 
just the effects of the dasa period will oocnr. 

(e) . According to the-Commentator, the Moon causes 
prosperity while it passes through - the several places men¬ 
tioned in the text. These plaoes are with reference to the 
signs oocupied by the lords of the dasa and antardasa pe 
riods in the course of their motions in the ecliptic. 

(f) . Friendly for the time being. 

(gr). Or antardasas acoording to Commentator. 

(h). Vide note (e). 

(t). That is when the Moon passes through the other 
plaoes. 

11. If, at the time of commencement of the dasa pe¬ 
riod of a planet, the Moon oocupy sign Cancer, the native 
will beoome rich, live in comfort and become a man of 
note ; if, at the time, the Moon occupy sign Aries or sign 
Scorpio, his .wife will beoome unchaste; if the Moon occu¬ 
py either sign Gemini or sign Virgo, the person will be¬ 
come more learned, get more friends and become rich; if 
the Moon occupy sign Leo, the person will live in dense 
and impenetrable forests; if the Moon j occupy sigu Taurus 
or sign Libra, he will eat sumptuous meals ; if she oocupy 
sign Capricorn or sign Aquarius, he will get a bad Woman, 
and if the Moon oocupy sign Sagittari or sign Pisces, the 
p ersonwill become rich, happy and respected. 


Digitized by 


Google 


i 



84 


BR1HAT JATAKA. 


[OH. 8 

12. Ia the benefic(a) dasa period(b) of the San, a 
person will acquire wealth by dealing in perfumes, nails, 
tusks of elephants and the like animals, in tiger skin and 
the like, in gold, by means of roads, by the king and 
by battle. He will become cruel, oonrageous, persevering, 
renowned and valorous. In the malefio dasa period of the 
Sun, he will get into trouble through his wife, son, money, 
enemy, weapons, fire or the king, and he will become liberal 
in gifts and addicted to sinful deeds,* he will quarrel with 
his s4rvants and will become afflioted in mind and suffer 
from ohest pain and the like diseases. 

Notes. 

‘ (a). The technical names, suoh as Sampnrna, Adhama, 
Ac., given to the planets indicate the benefio or the malefio 
character of their dasa period, vide note(d) to stanza 7. 

If the dasa period be both benefio and malefio, the na¬ 
ture of the events will be both good and bad. 

(b).. Or antardasa period according to Commentator. 

13. In the benefio dasa period of the Moon, the per¬ 
son will derive benefits by dealing in or by means of the 
mantras, the Brahmins, the productions of sugar-cane, milk, 
ghee, aud the like, cloth, flower, play, sesamum seed, and 
food \ he will respeot virtuous Brahmins and the Deyas ; he 
will get daughters and will acquire an inorease of wisdom, 
wealth and renown. 

In the malefio dasa period of the Moon, the person 
will indulge in sleep and idleness, will lose his wisdom* 
wealth and renown and will quarrel with powerful men and 
with kinsmen. 

. 14. In the benefic dasa period of Mars the person will 
■ fight with his enemies, will acquire wealth through his 
brother, the king, lands, woollen goods and goats. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



brihat jatara. 


85 


OH. 8 ] 

In the malefic dasa period of Mars, the person will 
hate his sons, friends, wife, brothers, learned men and pre¬ 
ceptors ; he will suffer from diseases caused by or connect- 
- ed with thirst, blood, fever, bile, loss of limbs or sexual in* 
tercourse with other women. He will associate with men 
doing wicked deeds; he will become vicious, harsh in 
speeoh and cruel. 

15. In the benefio dasa period of Mercury the person 
will acquire wealth by doing acts of message and through 
friends, preceptors and Brahmins. He will attain renown 
among learned men. He will become famous and will get 
brass and the like mixed metals, gold, horns, lands, popu¬ 
larity, comfort and ease* He will ridioule others and will 
serve under other men. He will get an increase of wisdom 
and successfully do deeds of virtue. 

In the malefic dasa period of Mercury the person will 
become harsh in his speeoh and will suffer from grief, ira 
prisonment,pain of mind and diseases arising from an affec* 
tion of the three dhatus —vata (the air), pitta (bile), and 
ileshma (phlegm.) 

16. In the benefic dasa period of Jupiter, the person 
will acquire wealth by acts of worship, by his learning, valor, 
ingenuity, bright personal appearance, military fame, man¬ 
tras, the king and the Vedas* He will have an increase of 
gold, horses, precious stones and elephants and will acquire 
the friendship of good kings. 

In the malefic dasa period of Jupiter, the person will 
learn things requiring much ingenuity, will suffer from foqt 
journey and pain in the ear and Will quarrel with wicked 
men. 

17. In the benefic data period of Venus, the person 
will enjoy sweet itnusic, various pleasures, perfumes, sump¬ 
tuous meals, aloohol, fine cloths, women, and precious 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



86 bbihAt jataka. , [oh. 8. 

stones. He will bo of fine appearance, valorous, and will 
enjoy every substance, provoking sexual passion, will be¬ 
come learned in the Sastras, will obtain the object of bis 
desire, will acquire friends, will beoome skilled in trade and 
in agriculture, and will get hidden treasures and wealth. 

In the malefic dasa period of Venus, the person will 
quarrel with crowds of people, with the king, hunters and 
wicked men and he will suffer much from his own friends. 

18, In the benefic dasa period of Saturn the person 
will get asses, camels, birds, buffaloes and old women, will 
rule over hamlets, villages or towns, and will thereby become 
renowned and will get grain of inferior quality. 

In the malefic dasa period of Saturn the person will 
suffer from phlegmatic and windy complaints / will be 
jealous, angry, distracted in mind, dirty, exposed to danger, 
idle, suffer from grief, and be much troubled. His servants, 
sons, daughters and wife will exercise authority over him 
and he will suffer from defective organs. 

19. If the dasa period be a benefic one, the effects 
will be good ; if it be a malefic one, the effects will be bad, 
If it be of a mixed nature, the effects will be both good and 
bad j the effects for the Lagoa dasa are the same as the 
effects for the dasa period of the lord of the rising sign* 

Notes. 

As stated already, the character, whether benefic or 
malefic of a dasa period is to be determined from the £eohr 
nical names given to the lord of the period. Vide stanzas 
6 and 7. Again, if, at the time of birth, any of the planets 
• occupy the Upaohaya houses, be of bright discs and of 
distinct motion, the effects will be good in their dasa pe¬ 
riods. Bat if the planets suffer defeat in conjunction, ^ 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHA.T JAtAkA. 


67 


C?H. 8] 

of disagreeable appearance or of small discs, the effects will 
be bad in tbeir dasa periods. The planets, which, at the 
time of commencement of their antardasa periods, might 
be aspected by benefic planets or occupy the Vargas (divi¬ 
sions) of benefic or atimitra (very friendly) planets are power¬ 
ful and will not cause death ; if they be situated otherwise 
they will cause death. 

20. In the bonefic dasa periods of the planets a person 
will acquire the several metals assigned to the planets (vide 
Chapter II. 12) and in the malefic dasa periods of the 
planets he will lose them. Again, in the antardasa period 
of a planet a person’s occupation will be that mentioned 
for the planet (vide Chapter X.) The effects described for 
the 12 houses from the ascendant, for the 12 signs from 
Aries, -for planetary aspects and for all yogas excepting 
Nabhasa yogas (Ch. 12) will occur in the dasa period of the 
planet which is most powerful among the yoga planets. 

21. In the dasa period of a particular planet, the 
person’s complexion will be that due to the elementary 
principle presided over by the planet and the complexion 
will be aocompanied by certain other qualities due to the 
same elementary principles and discernible by their res¬ 
pective organs of sense. 


Notes. 

Physical man is a composition of the five elementary 
principles—earth, water, fire, air and akas (ether) : Mercury 
presides over earth; Venus and the Moon over water; 
Mars and the Sun over fire ; Saturn over air ; and Jnpiter 
over Akas. In the dasa period of a particular planet, his 
elementary principle will predominate and the complexion 
of the person during such period will be that due to the 

12 




Digitized by 


Google 


A 



88 


BRIJIAT JATAKA. 


[oh. 8 


particular elementary principle, Yaraha Mihira in Chapter 
68 of his Brihat Samhita (Stanzas 90 [to 93) lias thus 
stated in detail the complexion due to each of the seven 
.planets: 

€t The complexion discernible in shining teeth, skin, 
nails and hairs of the body and of the head will be attend¬ 
ed with prosperity ; it is caused by the element of earth ; 
it makes the person happy, rich and virtuous/ 9 

“ The complexion which is glossy, white, dear, green 
and agreeable to look at is caused by the element of water; 
it will make all creaturos possessing it happy and successful 
in all their attempts and will produce wealth, comfort, 
luxury and prosperity.” 

44 The oomplexion which is fearful, unbearable, of the 
color of the lotus, gold or fire, and indicating strength, power 
and valor, is caused by the element of fire, and it brings 

success to a person and enables him to gain his desired 
object.” 

u The complexion which is dirty, not glossy, black and 
of bad scent, is caused by the element of air ; it will cause 

to the person death or imprisonment, disease, ruin and loss 
of wealth.” 

t€ The complexion which is of the color of crystal, 
noble, dear and indicating wealth and generosity, is caused 
by the element of ether; it gives a person all. that he 
desires.” 

Now suppose the dasa period to bo that of Mars, his 
element is fire ; the oomplexion caused by the elementary 
principle of fire described above, will be the complexion of a 
person in the dasa period of Mars and so for the other 
planets. 

Again, the property of earth is smell, discernible by 
the nose ; that of water is taste, discernible by the tongue 
that of fire or light is shape or appearance, discernible by 





Digitized by 


Google 



BRJH1T ik TAKA* 


89 


ch* 8] 


the eye ; that of air is touch, discernible by the body ; and 
that of Akas is sound, discernible by the ear* Suppose the 
dasa period to be that of Venus, his element is water ; the 
quality belonging to water is taste, discernible by the 
tongue. Therefore in the data period of Venus, the person 
will eat juifey meals according to his desire. In the dasa 
period of Jupiter (Akas—sound), the person’s speech will be 
sweet aud agreeable to the ear ; in the period of Mercury 
(earth—smell), the person’s body will be with an agreeable, 
odor ; in that of Mars (fire—shape) he will be of agreeable 
appearance;'and in that of Saturn (air—touch, he will be of 
soft body. From a careful observation of these qualities 
the particular dasa period of a person may also be deter 
mined. 


22. In the benefic dasa period of a planet the good 
effects are caused immediately by the Divine Soul living 
within the body and assuming for the time being a benefic 
character, (a) When a person is found to enjoy the good 
effects described for a planetary dasa period, it may be 
concluded that such dasa period is going on at the time. As 
regards the effects described for planets which might be 
powerless, these are experienced by a person either in his 
dream or in mental reveries. 


NoteB. 

(a). If the dasa period be a malefic one, the divine soul 
assumes a malefic character for the time* and if the period 
be of a mixed nature, the divine Boul assumes a correspond¬ 
ing character. 

(h). A wild train of thought in which a person enjoys 
or suffers according to his hopes or fears. 

23. If the character of the lord of a dasa period be 
found to bebenefio under one yoga and malefic under another 
yoga* neither of the effects will occur ; if two yogas give a 




Digitized by ^.ooQle 



90 


BBIHAT JATKA. 


[ch. 8 


character and one another character, the former will take 
effect. But if to two distinct planets conflicting effects 
have been assigned, both will come to pass. 

Notes.—The division of life into dasas as given by the 
author is hardly studied by Indian astrologers, evidently 
from the difficulties attending its application. These astrolo¬ 
gers, us a class, employ the exceedingly simple division of 
life into what is known asUdu or Nakshatra dasas. According 
to this the maximum period of human life is divided into 9 
parts presided over by the seven planets and by ltahu and 
Ketu—the two nodes of the Moon. They come in the fol¬ 
lowing order and their years are also given below: 

(1) The Sun, 6 years. (5) Jupiter, 16 years. 

(2) The Moon, 10 „ (6) Saturn, 19 „ 

(8) Mars, 7 „ (7) Mercury, 17 „ 

(4) Rahu, 18: „ (8) Ketu, 7 „ 

(9) Venus, 20 years. 

The lord of the dasa period at the time of birth is ascer¬ 
tained from the asterism whioh the Moon occupies at the 
time—the nine triangular asterisms represent the nine 
dasas: if therefore at the time of birth, the Moon occupy 
one of the triangular asterisms of 

Krittika,U. Phalguni and U. Ashadha,the dasa period 
i9 that of the Sun. 

Roll ini, Hasta and Sravana ... Moon. 

Mrigaairsha, Chitra and Sravislita ... Mars. 

Ardra, Swati and Satabhishak ... Rahu. 

. Punarvasu, Visakha and P. Bhadrapada ... Jupiter. 

Puahya, Anuradha and U. Bhadrapada ... Saturn. 

Aslesha, Jyeshta and Revati 

Aswini, Magha and Mala 

Bharani, P. Phalguni aud P. Ashadha 


... Mercury. 

... Ketu. 

... Venn*. 


Digitized by 


Google 



fcBIHAT J A TAKA* 


Bt 


6h. 8] 


* How much of the period of a particular dasa bas elapsed 
and how much remains at the time of birth must be ascer¬ 
tained from the portion of the aster ism passed over by the 
Moon and the portion remaining at the time. This may be 
roughly ascertained from the time taken by the Moon to go 
over the portion of the asterisra—the whole time in whioh 
the Moon passes through a particular asterism (as given in 
the Calendar) representing the full period of a dasa ; e-g • 
suppose the Moon to take 64 ghatikas and 42 vighatikas 
to go over the asterism of Krittika, and suppose that at the 
time of birth, the Moon has gone over a portion of asterism 
covered by 24 ghatikas and 16 vighatikas. Required the 
number of years remaining at the time of birth in the dasa 
period of the Sun. Now the time in which the Moon will 
go over the remaining portion of the astorism of Krittika= 
64 gh. 42. vigh—24 gh. 16 vigh. =40 gh. 26 vigh. Now 64 
gh. and 42 vigh. represent the whole period of 6 years of the 
Sun. Therefore time required 
6 years 

- - — X 40 gh. 26 vigh* 

64 gh* 42 vigh. 

6 


-- = -X 40 X60>26. 

64 X 60 + 42 

6 6 
= - — > X 2426 years = ——1213 years 
3882 1941 v 

7278 


=3 -years = 3 years, 8 months* 29 days, 

1941 


61 ghatikas, 39 vighatikas. 

To this must- be added in the order stated the dasa 
periods of the Moon, Mars, Rahu, &c., till we come to the 
present age of the person. 

Again, the nine dasa periods are each divided into 9 
sub-divisons known as antardasas—the lord of the first 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



02 


BItjHAT jataka. 


|oh. 9 

antardasa being Ike lord of the dasa period, and those 
of the antardasas which follow are the same as the lords 
of the dasa periods which follow ; so that the antardasas, 
of the dasa period} of Jupiter fur instance are those of Jupiter 
Saturn, Mercury, Kelu, Venus, the Sun, theMoon, Mars and 
Rahu. The length of the antardasa periods bear the same 
proportion to each other as the lengths of the dasa periods. 
For instance, required the length of the ^antardasa period 
of Venus in the dasa period*of Jupiter. The dasa period of 
Jupiter is 16 years, that of Venus is 20 years, that of all the 
planets is 120 years ; therefore the length of the antardasa 
16 years 8 

period required =- && years = - years=2years 

120 years 8 

and 8 months. 

Again, each of the antardasa period is further sub- 
divided into 9 parts in the same proportion, known as 
Sukshma periods. The appendix will contain tables for the 
periods of the dasa, antardasa and sakehma, periods— 
also for readily ascertaining by mere inspection the 
period from one dasa period to another and from one antar¬ 
dasa period to another antardasa period. 


CHAPTER IX. 

ON AsHTA.KAVABGA8(a). 

1. The benefio plaoes of the Sun are the 1st, 2nd, 
4th, 7th, 8th, 9th 10th and 11th houses from himself ; the 
same places from Mars and Saturn ; the 0th, 7th ,and 12th 
.houses from Venus ; the 5th, 6th, 9th and 11th houses 
from Jupiter; the 3rd, 6 th, 10th and 11th houses from 
theMoon; the 3rd, 5th, 6th, 9th, lObh, 11th, and 12th 
houses from Mercury, and the 3rd, 4th, 6th, 10th, 11th and 
12 th houses from Lagna. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 9] 


BR1HAT JATAKA. 


93 


(a). This means the benefic and mnlefio places of a 
planet with reference to eight places—the plaoes occupied 
by the seven planets and the Lagna at the time of birth. 

2. The benefic places of the Moon are the 3rd, 6th, 

10th and 11th houses from Lagna ; the 2nd, 3rd, 5tb, 6tb, 

9th, 10th, and lHh houses from Mars ; the 1st, 3rd, 6th, 

7th, 10th and lltli houses from herself (Moon) ; the 3rd, 

6th, 7th, 8th, 10th and 11th houses from the Sun ; the 3rd» 

5th, 6th and 11th houses from Saturn ; the 1st, 3rd, 4th, 

5th, 7th, 8th, 10th and lltli houses from Mercury ; the 1st, 

4th, 7th, 8th, 10th, 11th and 12th houses from Jupiter; and 
the 3rd, 4th, oth, 7th, 9th, 10th aod 11th houses from 
Venus. 

3. The benefic places of Mars are the 3rd, 5th, 6th 
10th and 11th houses from the Sun ; the 1st, 3rd, 6th 10th 
and 11th houses from Lagna; the 3rd, 6th, and 11th house* 
from the Moon ; the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th, and 11th 
houses from himself (Mars),* the 1st, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9tb, 10th 
and 11th houses from Saturn ; the 3rd, otb, 6th and 11th 
houses from Mercury, the 6th, 8th, 11th and 12tli houses 
from Venus; and the 6th, 10th, 11th and 12th houses from 
Jupiter. 

4. The benefio places of Mercury are the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 

4th, 5th, 8th, 9th and llbh houses from Venus ; the vst, 

2nd, 4th, 7th, 8tb, 9th, 10th and 11th houses from Saturn 
and Mars; the 6tb, 8th, 11th and 12th houses from Jupiter; 
the 5th, 6th, 9th, llth and 12th houses from the Sun; the 
1st, 3rd, 6th, 6tb, €ftb, !0th and llth^houses from himself; /£ 
the 2nd, 4th, 6th.^ 10th and llth houses from the Moon;^/^ 
and the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th, and llth houses from 
Lagna. 

5. The benefio places of Jupiter are the 1st, 2nd, 4th- 
7th, 8tli, 10th and Hth houses from Mars; the lstj2od, 3rd 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



94 


BBIHAT JATAKA. 


[oh. 9 


4th, 7th, 8th, lOthAnd 11th houses'from himself ;tho 1st, 2nd 
3 rd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th houses from the Sun; 
the 2nd, 5th, 6th, 9th 10th and 11th houses from Venus; 
the 2nd, 5th, 7th, 9th and 11th houses from the Moon ; the 
3rd* 5th,6th and 12th houses from Saturn; the 1st, 2nd,4th, 
5 th, 6th, 9th, 10th, and 11th houses from Mercury, and the 
1 st, 2nd, 4tli, 5th, 6th, 7th, 9th^l0th and 11th houses from 
Lagna. w 


6 . The benefio places of Venus are the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 
m 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th and lUli houses from Lagna; the 1st, 2nd, 
* 8rd, 4th, 5th n lHh and 12th houses from the Moon ;tbe 1st, 
2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th houses from him¬ 
self ; the 3rd, 4th, 5th, 8th, 9th, 10th and 11th houses from 
Saturn; the 8th, llthand 12th bouses from the Sun ; the 
5th,8th, 9th, 10th and 11th houses from Jupiter; the 3rd, 
5 th, 6th, 9th aud 11th houses from Mercury ; and the 3rd,. 
5th, 6th, 9th, 11th and 12th houses from Mars. 


7. The benefio places of Saturn are the 3rd, 5th, 6th 
and 11th houses from himself ; the 3rd, 5th, 6th, 10th, 11th 
and 12th housea from Mars ; the 1st, 2nd, 4th, 7th, 8th, 10th 
and 11th houses from the Sun; the 1st,3rd, 4th, 6th, 10th 
and 11th houses from Lagna ; the 6th, 8th, 9tb, 10th, 11th 
and 12th houses from Mercury ; theSrd,6th, and 11th honses 
from the Moon ; the 6th, 11th and the 12th houses fromVenns ; 
and the 5th, 6th, 11th aud 12th houses from Jupiter. 

8 . Thus have been described the benefio places of 
the planets ; the other places are malefio.(a) A place will 
produce benefio or malefic effects if it be more benefio for 
the planet than malefic or vice versa(i). 


These places are all with reference to the places occupi¬ 
ed by the planets at the time of birth. The planets while 
passing through places which happen to be the Upaohaya 
houses or whioh might be their own houses or their friendly 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRlHAT JATAKA. 


55 


CH. 9 ] 

or exaltation signs, produce benefio effects fully if suoli 
liouses or signs are more benefio for the planets than 
malefic ; and planets while passing through places which 
happen to be Apachnya houses or which might be their 
inimical or depression signs, produce malefic effects fully if 
such liouses or signs be more malefio for the planets than 
benefic. 


Notes. 

(a). For instance, the crd, 5th, 6th and 12th houses 
from himself are malefic places for the Sun. The 1st, 2nd, 
4tli, 5th, 7th, 8th, 9th, and 12th houses from Lagna are 
malefic places for the Moon, aud so forth. 

(5). In preparing tables of Ashtakavarga, it is usual 
to murk the benefic places with dots and the malefic places 
with lines. We will put dowu the Ashtakavarga table for 
Maris in the following horoscope 


Lngna. 

Venus. 

Sun. 

Moon. 

Mercury. 

i 


Rasi Chakra. 

Ju pitor. 

Mars. 




Saturn. 



Mark the benefic places; of Mars with dots and tho 
malefic places, with lines. The result will be found to be 
as follows. ‘ * 

13 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



9ff 


BBIHAT JATAKA- 


[oh. 9 


000 =5 8 

mu = fi 

000 = 3 
mu = 5 

000 = 3 
11111 ss 5 

«o 

IIII 

o £ 

O r-4 

o -» 

«-4 

00) = 8 
inn = 5 

Ashtaka Varga of Mars. 

0000 = 4 
im = 4 

00000> 5 
111 = 3 

00000 » 5 
111 = 3 

00 = 2 
mm = e 

0 = 1 
1111111 = 7 

00000 s* 6 
111 = 8 

00 =j 3 
111111= 6 


The table means that while Mars moves through sign 
Aries for instance* the benefio effects will be } and the 
malefic effects will be la other words he produces 
malefic effects to the extent of f—J- or £ of his power. 
Similar remarks apply to the other places. 

Notes.—The Aahatakavarga tables are generally pro-* 
pared with the number of benefio dots alone marked in them 
•—the nnmber representing the malefio lines being the 
difference between number 8 and the number of dots* The 
above table will then stand as follows ;— 


3, 

3, 

8. 

3. 

3. 



4. 

5. 


' 

a. 

2. 

i. 

5. 1 

2. 


AH these numbers represent the benefio dotg. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




BIUH1T JATAtA* 


tifr. &J 


»7 


The A.V. tables are Useful in the prediction of most 
of the important events of life. Regular treatises exist on 
this branch of horosoopy> which must be consulted for 
fall particulars* We shall give here some of the uses of 
the A* V. tables* 

The tables prepared) as stated above) with figures re¬ 
presenting benefic dots are subjected to two reductions or 
eliminations, known as Trikona and Ekadhipattya reduc¬ 
tions—that is, of the figures in the triangular signs, and of 
the figures in the several pairs of signs forming the houses 
of the planets from Mars to Saturn* 

I. 

TatKotfA or Triangular Reductions. 

The Triangular signs are given in the notes to St&U2a 
6 of Chapter t- The reduction rules are 

1. If the figures iu the triangular signs be not all alike 
subtract from each the least of the three figures, keeping 
the remainders- 

8. If there be no fignre in one of the!three signs, no 
reduction need be made. 

3. If there be no figure in two of the three signs 
remove the figure in the third. 

4. If the figures in the three signs be equal, remove 
them all. 

II. 


Ekadhipattya Reductions. 

The Ekadhipattya signs are given in the notes to 
Stanza 6'of Chapter I. The reduction rules are 

]. If there be planets in both the houses of a planet 
no reduction need be made. 

2. Of the two houses of a planet, one of which is 
oocnpied and the other not, (1) if the figure in tho former 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




'93 


BRJflAT JATAKA, 


[oh. 9 

be smaller than tho figure in the latter, make the latter 
equal to the former, (2) if the figure in the former be 
greater than the figure in the latter, remove the latter, (8) 9 
if the figures in ; both be equal, remove the] figure in 
the latter. 

3. Of the two houses of a planet, bothfof which are 
not occupied, (a), if the figures in the two houses be equal 
remove both ; (b) t if the figures be unequal, make the larger 
figure equal to the smaller oue. 

4. If there be no figure in one of the two houses no 
reduction need be made. 

5. The figures in'the signs CancerandiLoo, which are 
respectively the houses of the Moon and the Sun, are not 
subject to the Ekadhipattya reduction. 

Illustration. 

We will apply these rules to the A< V. table of Mars 
given already. 

. Reduction I. 

The figures in the Triangular signs of Aries, Leo and 
Saggittari are respectively 3, 5, 2. Under rule (1) subtract 
2 from eaoh, and tho resulting figures are 1, 3, 0. The 

figures in the triangular sighs of Taurus, Virgo and Capri¬ 
corn, are respectively 8, 2, 5. Applying rule (1) we get 
J, 0, 3. The figures in the triangular signs of Gemini, 
Libra and Aquaries are 3, 5, 3. Applying rule (1) we got 
0, 2, 0. The figures in the triaugular signs of Cancer, Scor¬ 
pio and Pisces are 4, 1,3. Applying rule (1) we get 3, 0, 2. 
So that tho A. V. of Mars after the first reduction stands as 
. follows 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



Cb. 9.] 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


2 

1 

1 

0 

0 

A. V. of Mara after Reduction 
No. I. 

3 

3 

3 

0 

0 

2 

0 


RtoucridN. No. II- 

iMiw reduction should be made only to the figures re¬ 
sulting from Reduction No- I* 

Of Aries and Scorpio, the two houses of Mars, Aries 
is occupied and Scorpio is unoccupied* The figures in them 
are I, and 0 j respectively. Under rule (4) no reduction need 
‘be made. Taurus and Libra, the two houses of Venus, are 
both occupied; under rule (1) no reduction need be made. 
Oemini and Virgo, the two houses of Mercury are both 
unoccupied, the figures in them are, o and o-Rule (4) applies 
and there is no necessity for reduction. Of Pisces and 
Sagittari, the two houses of Jupiter, the former alone 
.is occupied and the figures in them are 2 and o. Under 
rule (4) no reduction need be made. Of Aquarius and Cap¬ 
ricorn the two houses of Saturn the latter alone is occu¬ 
pied and the figures in them are o, and 3. Applying rule 
4 no reduction need be made* The figures in Oanoer and 
Leo, which are respectively the houses of the Moonandthe 
Sun, are not subject to reduotiou Vide rule 5. These figuros 
are 3 and 8. 

So that after Reduction No. II t!‘ n '. V. table of Mars 
will stand thus 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



100 


feRlttAT Miktk* 


tctti d. 


2 

1 

1 

0 

0 

A- V. fable'of Mars'after Reduc- 

8 

8 

tiona I atidjt. 

8 

0 

0 

2 | 

0 


The total of figures after the 2 red notions is 15. 

Similarly the A. V. tables of the Sun, the Moon, 
Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn may bo reduced. 

We will now give some of the uses of these tableB. 

A. V. of the Sun. 

In the case of A. V. of the Sun,(a) multiply the total 
of the figures after reductions by the figure in the 9th house 
from the Sun in the A. V. Divide the product by 27 and 
take the remainder. Mark the asterism, counting the re¬ 
mainder from As wini. When Saturn 'passes through such 
asterism or through its triangular asterisras either a person’s 
father or paternal uncle will die or suffer miseries if the 
planetary dasa period at the time be a malefic one. 

No work shall be commenced when the Sun passes 
through signs where there are no figures in A.V. of the Sun- 

During such periods a person suffers from diseases, 
misery and quarrel. 

Multiply the total of reduced figures by the figures 
in the 8tli house from the Sun in the A. V* of the 
Sun. Divide the product by 12. The remainder represents 
the sign (month) from Aries, through whioh or through one 
of its triangular signs when the Sun passes a person dies (in 
the year of his death). 

(a) A. V. of a planet is the A ah taka Varga of a planet before reduction # 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




" tm. 0.] 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


101 


Add together the three figures in each of the 4 sets of 
the triangular signs Aries,Leo, Sagittari, &c. Find out whioh 
of these totals is the largest. Find out the Dik or quarter 
for tbe'particnlar set of triangular signs giving the total. 
(Yido note if) to stanza 19 Chapter II). The place of wor¬ 
ship in the house of a'person will be in such direction. 

A. V. of the Moon. 

Multiply the total of the reduced figures by the figure 
in the 4th house from the Moou in A. Y of the Moon ; divide 
the product by 27* take the remainder and for it find out the 
asterism from'JAswini as before. When Saturn passes 
through such asterism or through its triangular asterisms 
a person’s mother dies or suffers miseries if the planetary 
dasa period at the time be a malefic one. 

Multiply the total of reduced figures by the figure in 
the 8th house from the Moon in the A. V. of the Moon. 
Divide the product by 27* Take the remaiuder; and for it 
find out the asterism from Aswiui as before. When the 
Moon passes through it or [through its triangular asterisms 
there will be quarrel, anger and.grief. 

No work shall be commenced when^the Moon passes 
through signs in which"there*are no figures in the A. Y. of 
the Moon. 

Find out£the Dik or quarter as before and it will give 
the positionjof_thejb&th«room in the house of^a-peraon. 

A. V. of Mars. 

When Saturn passes through signs in which there aro 
no figures in the A.Y. of Mars,4he person will suffer from 
diseases,* if Mars be powerful, and will die if Mars be weak 
and if he be not the lord of the ascendant. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



102 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


[cJK. 9 


Find out the Dik or quarter as before. 

It will give the position oE the kitchen in a person’s 
house, 

A. V. of Mercury. 

When Saturn passes through signs in whioh there are no 
figures in the A.V. of Meroury the person’s son or friends 
will die. 

Find out the Dik or quarter as before. 

It will give the position of the play-ground in the 
house of a person. 

A. Y. of Jupiter. 

The figure in the 5th house from Jupiter in the A.V. of 
Jnpiter will give the number of sons of a person. The num* 
ber of those meeting with early death will be the number of 
planots occupying inimical or depression signs. 

The Dik or quarter ascertained as before will give the 
position of the Treasury or store-room, 

A. V. of Venus. 

A person will get a wife, lands and wealth when Venus 
passes through signs containing the largest figure in the A. 
V. of Venus after reduction. 

The Dik or quarter ascertained as before will give the 
position of the bed room. 

A. V. of Saturn. 

In the A. V. of Saturn add together the figures iu the 
signs from the ascendant to the house occupied by Saturn 
und also figures iu the signs from Saturn to the ascendant. 
The two totals will give the years in which a person will 
suffer from diseases and from grief. Add the two totals the 
sum will give the year iu which a persoa’s lifo will bo iu 
danger. 

A similar romutk applies to the A. V. of Mars. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBJHAt JATAKi. 


103 


tti. 9 .] 

When the Son and the Moon pass through signs in 
I*inch the figures are le&st in the A. V. of Saturn, a person 
dies (iu his year of death). 

The Dik or quarter ascertained as heforo gives the 
position of the spot where the sweepings are gathered. 

Barvashtulca Varga 

The Ashtaka vargas of the San and other planets con¬ 
sidered separately are known as Bkinhoshbaka vargas and 
their sum forms what is known aS Sarvashtaka varga. In 
the latter, the figure in sign Aries is the sum of the figures 
in sign Aries in the several Bhinnasbtaka vargas; similarly 
the figure in sign Taurus’ of S. A. V. is the sum of the 
figures in sign Taunts of the B* A. Vs. and the figures 
of the other signs may be similarly obtained. The total of 
these figures will always be 337—this being the sum of the 
totals of the figured of the seven B> A. Vs, The latter figures 
are 48, 49, 89, 54, 56, 62 and 39 from Sun to Saturn. 

Now various events of life are predicted by means of the 
figures of the 8. A.V< table. 

(1) . If the figure in a particular sign exoeed 30 then 
planets passing through it will produce bonefic effects; if it 
be between 25 and 30, such effects will be neither good nor 
bad and if the figure be less than 25 the effects will be bad. 

Again, all good works shall be commenced when the 
rising sign is one whose figure is largest in the S. A. V. 
table and marriages and other connections shall be formed 
with persons whoso star is one of the stars of such sign. 

(2) . As the 10th house represents labour, the 11th 
house gain and the 12th loss, if the figure in the 11th house 
be greater than the figure in the 10th house and if the figure 
in the 12th house be smaller than the figure in the 11th house 
and if the figure in the ascendant be greater than the figure 

14 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



104 


SRIHAT /ATARI- 


[€H. & 


in the 12th house the person will be happy and prosperous— 
the meaning is clear, the labor being slight, gain much aud 
loss comparatively small. If the figures be otherwise the 
person will be unhappy. 

(3). Excepting the Oth, 8th and 12th houses, of the 
remaining 9 houses the significations of those where the 
figures are large will be in a condition of prosperity (Vide 
note (a) to Stanzt 15, Chapter I.) 

(4.) Add together the figures of the four signs from 
Pisces,—Pisces, Aries, Taurus and Gemini. Add also the 
figures of the four sigus from Cancer and of the four signs 
from Scorpio. These three totals represent the three 
sections of a man’s life. Whichever total is the largest, 
the corresponding division of life will be happy and pros¬ 
perous. If three or more malefio planets occupy the four 
signs from Pisces a person will suffer miseries in the 1st 
seotion of life ; if they occupy the four signs from Cancer 
the miseries will occnr in the 2nd section, and if they 
occupy the four signs from Scorpio, then, in the 3rd section 
of life. If the planets in the several seotions be benefio the 
person will be happy; and if both malefio and benefio pla¬ 
nets occupy the several sections the effects will be both 
good and bad. 

Add together the figures in the houses occupied by 
Saturn, Lagna and Mars. The sum will give the year in 
which a person will suffer from diseases and other miseries. 

G* Add together the figures of houses occupied by 
Itahu, Mars aud Saturn. The sum will give the year in 
which a person will suffer from poison, weapons aud 
wouuds. 

7. Add together the figures of the signs occupied by 
benefio phmets. The sum will give the year in which a 
person will get a sou* wealth and the like. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



brihat jataxa. 


105 


cn. 9.] 


8. Multiply the total of the figures of A. V. of tho 
planet who is the lord of the 8ih house from the.ascendant 
by the figure of tho 8th house in S. A. Y. table. Divide 
the product by 12; the temainder will give the Month from 
Aries in which a person dies (in the year of his death.) 

In the same way the month of death of a person’s 
father may be ascertained by a similar calculation with 
reference to the 9th house and that of the mother with 
reference to the 4th house. 

9- Find out from the S. A. V. table the powerful Dik 
or quarter. Cow sheds 9 rice fields, agricultural operations 
shall be conducted in such dik or quarter and the weak dik 
or quarter shall be rejected for all purposes. 

Again, Parasara in his Horn Sastra, a very volu¬ 
minous work, has treated of 82 distinct processes for ascer¬ 
taining the length of human life- They are : 

I. Pindayurdaya ... . 12 

II. Dhrhvayurdaya ... ... 4 

III. Raamikayurdaya ... ... 4 

IY. Amsakayurdaya . ... 4 

V. AshtakavHi'gaynrdaya . 4 

IV. Vishayayurdaya ... . 2 

VII- Nakshatramsakayurdnya .. 2 

Total 82 

L Pindayurdaya. 

This is divided into 3 schools, (1) that of Yavanaoharya 
(vide Stanza I Ch. 7), (2) that of Jeevasarma (vide stanza 
9 (Jh- 7}, (8) that of Bodnrayana according to which the 
maximum years of each planet when in his exaltation sign 
is one-seventh of 100 years. 

Eh oh of these three schools has 4 sub-divisions: (a) 

Tho Neechsrdhharana process according to which the 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



106 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


[en. 9.- 

maximum period is one-half at depression. ( b) The Neecba- 
bhavo process according to which the period vanishes 
at depression, (o) The Krita harana process according to 
which the periods suffer reductions, (d) The Akrita harana 
procoss according to which the periods suffer no reduotions. 

Thus Pindayurdayo is of 19 sorts. 

If. Dhruvayurdaya. 

This is otherwise known as Nysargikaynrdaya. (vide 
Stanza ^9 Ch. 8). As stated above there ore 4 kinds of this: 
depending on the 4 divisions mentioned above—(a), (6), (c) 
And (<f). 

III. Rasmikayurdaya. 

According to this the years of the planets from the 
Sun to Saturn are respectively 16, 20,9,8, 9, 26, and 26, 
There are 4 kinds of this as stated above. 

TV Am sakayurdaya. 

This is Satyacharyar’s method referred to at the end 
of stanza 9 Ch. 7, This process, in oertain cases has to be 
varied into what is known as Prakramanugata method. 
(The two processes again divide, eaoh, into two parts known 
as Kritavridhika and Akritavridhika— V e. the years are to 
be increased according to some and not to be increased 
according to others, Vide Parasara’s Horn Sastra. Thus 
we get 4 kinds of Amsakaynrdaya. 

V. Ashtahavargayurdaya. 

This prooess as stated above has to be varied into 
what is known as Prakramanugata method. The two pro-< 
cesses again divide, each, into two parts known as Krita- 
vridhi and Akritavridhi as stated above, Vide I'arasara 
IIora. Thus we get 4 kinds of Ashfakavargayurdaya. One 
of these 4 methods is given at the end of these notes, 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



co. 9.] 


BRJHAT J ATARI. 


107 


VI. Vishayayurdaya. 

This consists of two kinds—the one according to P«ra- 
sara and the other as mentioned in a work named Prakri- 
vamala. These partake of the nature of the Aahtakavarga 
process. 

VII. Ndkshatramsakayurdaya’ 

This is of two kinds—the one is known os the Kola" 
chakra process and the other as the Naksktrndasa, 

Thns 82 processes are mentioned by Parasara who at 
the same time states the particular cases to which each 
process is applicable. Of these 32 processes, Varaha Mihira 
has mentioned the most important ones in chapter 7. For 
farther particulars in Aynrdaya the reader is referred to 
the works of Parasara and other writers. 

We shall here state the details of the Ashtakavarga' 
process. The following tables are employed in the process. 


Rasi Gnnakara or Zodiacal faotors. 


Aries 

Taurus 

Qemini 

Cancer 

Leo 

Yirgo 


7 

... 10 

... 8 

.. 4 

... 10 

... 6 


Libra 

Scorpio 

Sagittari 

Capricorn 

Aquarins 

Pisces 


Graha 

The Sun 
The Moon 
Mars 


Gunakara or Planetary factors 


Mercury 

Jupiter 

Venus 


7 

8 
9 
5 

11 

12 


... 5 

... 10 ‘ 

7 


SATURN. 5, 

Multiply the several figures in the signs from Aries in 
the Ashtakavarga of the Sun by the figures of the Rasi 
Gunakara table respectively, and add the products- 

Again multiply the several figures in the signs occu¬ 
pied by the Son and other planets by the figures, of. the 


Digitized by t^,ooQle 







103 


BRIHAT JATA*A. 


[CH. 9. 


jBraha Guuakura (able respectively and add the products. 
Add tlm two totals^. Multiply the sum by 7; divide the 
poduct by 27. The quotient will give the years of the Sun, 
Multiply the remainder by 12 and divide the product by 27 
the quotient will give the months ; multiply the remainder 
by 80 and divide the product by 27 ; the quotient will give 
the days, and similarly find the Ghatikas and Yighatikas. 
Thus we have obtained the A. V. years of the Sun. 

Similarly those of the Moan, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, 
Venus and Saturn may be obtained from the A. V. tables. 

Now these periods are subject to the following reduc¬ 
tions. 

(1.) If a planet is accompanied by another planet in 
a sign the amount of reduction is one-half of the period 
obtained. 

(2.) If a planet occupy his depression sign, the 
amount of reduction is one-half. 

(3.) If he be an Astangata planet, the amount of re¬ 
duction is also one-half. 

(4.) If he occupy an mimical sign, the amount is one- 
third. 

(5.) If he oocupy the visible hemisphere the amount 
is one-half. 

(<’•) If he suffer defeat in conjunction the amount is 
one-third. 

(7 ) In the case of the Sun and the Moon again, if 
these be of unusual appearance the amount is one-third. 

.V B, Where several reductions have to be applied to 
the period of a planet it will be enough if the largest of them 
be alone made. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BKIHAT jata Hi. 


100 


Cu. fb] 


After making the sevearl redactions odd up the result* 
ing years of the plaoets, multiply the sum by 3-4 and divide 
the product by 3G5. The quotient will give the length of a 
person’s life in years, months, days, <te. 

Again, in the A. V. of Saturn as before, multiply the 
figures of the several signs from Aries by the Zodiacal fac¬ 
tors and add up the products. Multiply the figures in the 
several signs occupied by the Sun and other planeta by the 
several planetary factors and add up the products. Add 
together the two totals. To the sum add the sum of the 
figures resulting after making the Trikona and Bkadhi- ; 
patya reductions to the figures of the A. V. of Saturn* 
Multiply the sum by the figure in the 8th house from the 
ascendant id the A. V. of Saturn ; divide the product by 27 ; 
the quotient will also give the length of a person’s life, pro¬ 
vided suoh length is otherwise found to rUuge between 34 
and 60 years ; the length of life will be 27 years less than 
the period obtained if the person’s age is otherwise found 
to range from 1 to 33 years and 27 years more than the 
period obtained if such length be found to range between 
67 and 100 years and death will ocour if. the dona period be 
a malefic ona . There are brief processes for ascertaining 
by inspection whether the length of life of a person falls in 
the first, or the second or the third section of the maxi¬ 
mum period of 100 years Vide, the Astrological Aphorisms 
of Jaimuui. 

Hitherto we have been dealing with the tables of 
the B. A. V. and S. A* Y« prepared with the figures re¬ 
presenting the benefic planetary places. Tables can also be 
prepared with figures representing the malefic places of the 
planets. {Vide note b, to stansa 8). Special rules exist , 
relating to the prediction of events of life with tlio help 
of the figures of these tables- The reader is referred to 
the works of Parasara. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



110 


BBItUf JATAKA. 


[CH. 10. 

CHPTER X 

On AvooaMon. 

]. A ppfson gets wealth from his father, mother* 
enemy, friend* brother, wife or servant according as the 
planet which occupies the 10th house from the Lagna or 
from the Moon is the Sun, or the Moon, or Mors or 
Mercury, or Jupiter or Venus or Saturn respectively (o). 
If there be no such planet, the avocation of a person will 
be that stated for the planets (6) which might be the 
lords of the Navamsas occupied by the lords of the 10th 
houses from Lagna, the Moon and the Sun (e). 

Notes. 

(а) . If the 10th house from the ascendant and the 
10th house from the Moon be both occupied by planets, a 
person will acquire wealth from both sources, and if several 
planets occupy the ;10th house there will Ira several soarces 
of wealth. 

(б) . Vide stanzas 2 andS, 

(o) Suppose sign Canoer is tbei tiagna j the 10th house 
from Cancer is Aries; the lord of Aries is Mars; suppose 
Mars to oooupy the Naramsa of Sagittari j the lord of 
Sagittari is Jupiter and the avocation stated for Jupiter 
(vide 3rd stanza) will be the arooation of a person. It 
also follows that a person’s avocation will be all the three 
stated for the lords of the Navamsas occupied by the 
lords of the 10th houses from Lagna, the Moon and the 
Sun. 

2. If the lord of the Nnvnmsa (a) be the Sun, a 
person will deal in perfumes, gold, woollen fabric, medeoiue, 
abd the like. If the lord be the Moon, he will till lands 
or deal iu the productions of water (b) Or get money 

through women, (c) If he be Mors, the person will deal 


Digitized by Tooele 



BBlBJLT JATA BA- 


111 


6b. 10-3 


iu metals or minerals* fire (d) or weapons and will also ac¬ 
quire wealth by acts of boldness j if he be Meronry, the 
person will be a writer, an accountant, and the like (e) and 
trill also Acquire wealth by various handicraft (/)• 

Notes. 

(tt). That is the lord of the Navatnsa occupied by the 
lord of the 10 th house from Lagoa, the Moon and the Sun. 

(j). Such as pearls, conoh shells, whale-bones and 
the like. 

<*)• By serving under or otherwise following them* 

(<Z). Fire: he may be the driver of a fire engine or 
a dealer in matches and the like. # 

(6). By writing commentaries on the works of writers 
and the like. 

(/). Bach as painting* book-binding* arrow-making 
or the making of flower-wreaths* sandal paste* perfumes 
and the like* 


If the lord of the Navamsa be Jupiter* a person 
Will get Wealth through Brahmins, the DeVaS ofr learned 
men, through mines (a) and the like (6) and through acts 
of virtue (d) ;if he be Venus, the persoki will [deal in geins*(d) 
silver and other metals* in cows and buffaloes; and if 
the lord be Saturn* the person'will acquire wealth by means 
of hard labour* (e) by acts of torture, (/) by carrying bur¬ 
dens and by low deeds nnsuited to his rank. Thns persons 
acquire wealth by avocation stated] for the [lords of 
Navamsas occupied by the lords of the 10th house, (g). 

(a). The word in the text is Akara which*includes 
gold and silver mines* places where salt is produced or 
where elephants are found. 

(M. Such as contract work. 

15 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



112 J5B1UAT JATAKA- [ctf. 11. 

( t ). Such as sacrificial rites, gifts, acts of charity, 
pilgrimage, service under (Jan* or preceptor. 

( d ). Sucli as diamonds, rubies, and the like. 

(s). Such as 'walking and the like. 

(/.) Either by self torture or torturing other creatures* 

(<7 ) From Lagna, the Moon and the Sum 

4. If such yoga planet (a) occupy ( 6 ) a friendly sign, 
a person will acquire wealth (in the dasa or antardasa period 
of such planet) through a friend. If such yoga planet 
oocupy an iniinioal sign, the person will get wealth through 
his enemy ; and if such planet occupy his own house, the 
person will get wealth by means of his house. If, when 
the Sun happens to be the yoga planet, he ocoup}’ bis exal¬ 
tation sign, the person will acquire wealth by his own 
powers. If (at the time of birth) powerful benefic planets 
occupy the 11 th house, the Lagoa or the 2 nd house, the 
person will acquire wealth in various ways (c). 

Notes. 

(a). That is either the planet which occupies the 
10 th house from the ascendant or the Moon or the planet 
which is the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the lord of 
the 10th house from Lagna, the Moon and the Sun. 

( l ). At the time of birth. 

(c). Jn other words he will prosper well whatever 
may bo the evocation he may choose to follow. 


CHAPTER XI. 

On Raja yoga or thk Bibth or Kings. 

1 . A ocordiug to the Yavauas a person born when three 
dr more malefic planets are iu their exaltation signs 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



PRfHAT JATAKA. 


113 


CH. 11.} 

becomes rt tyrannical king (a). According to Jeevnsnrmtv if 
such planets be maleGc a person will never beeome a 
king (b). 

Notes* 

(а) . If three or more planets occupying their exal¬ 
tation signs be benefic, the person becomes a good king; 
if both benefio and maleiio he will become both a good and 
a bad king. 

(б) v According to Jeevasarma, such a person becomes 
rich and powerful but not a king. Varha Mihira is of the 
opinion of the Yavanas. 

2. Of the!four planets, Mars, Saturn, the Sun, and Jupi¬ 
ter by all the four or any three of them occupying exalta. 
tion signs while each of the planets occupies the Lagna, the 
number of Rajayogas is 16. Again, of the same four pla¬ 
nets by any two or by any one occupying exaltation signs 
and in each case by each of the planets occupying the 
Lagna while the Moon occupies sign Cancer, the number 
of Rajayogos is also 16. 

Notes, 

32 Bajayoga&are mentioned in this stanza^ A per¬ 
son born under auy one of them becomes a king : suppose 
all the 4 planets—Mars, Saturn, the Suu and Jupiter—to 
occupy their exaltation signs at the same time; by any ono 
of such signs being the ascendant the number of Rajayogas 
obtained is 4. Again, of the same 4 planets there are 4 
groups, each of three planets " thus (1) Mars, Saturn and> 
the Sun, (2) Mars, Saturn and Jupiter, (3) Mars, the Sun 
and Jupiter, (4) Saturn, the Sun and Jupiter. In Who case 
of eaoh group,, by all the three planets occupying their exal¬ 
tation signs and by each of such signs being the rising 
sign,, the number of Rajayogas obtained is 3 ; there being 4 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



114 


brihat jataka. 


[CH. 11. 


such groups the number of Rajayogas obtained from tliem 
all is 4X3 or 12. Adding this to the 4 yogas~a1ready ob¬ 
tained we get the first 16 yogas mentioned in the text. 

Again, of the same 4 planets, there are O^groups each 
of 2 planets ns follows (1) Mars and Saturn, (2) Mars and 
the Sun, (&) Mars and Jupitor, (4) Saturn and the Sun, (5) 
Saturn and Jupiter and (6) the Sun and Jupiter. In the 
case of each group by both the planets occupying their 
exaltation signs and by each of such signs being the. rising 
sign* the number of Rajayogas obtained is. 2. There being 
6 such groups, the number of yogas obtained from them all 
is 6X2 or 13. In each of these 12 cases, the Moon occupies 
sign Cancer. Again, of the same 4 planets, by their seve¬ 
rally being in their exaltation signs, while such sign is also, 
the rising sign, the number of Rajayogas obtained is In 
each of those 4 cases, the Moon occupies sigu Cancer. Add¬ 
ing these 4 yogas to the 12 yogas already obtained we get 
the second 16 yogas mentioned \n the text. 

3, The. Lagoa or the Moon being in Vargottamn posi¬ 
tions, of all the planets, excepting the Moon, by the several 
groups of four, five and six planets aspecbing the Lagna or 
the Moon, the number of yogas obtained is 22;. 

Notes. 

The six planets are, the Sun, Mars, Mercury Jupiter* 
Yenus and Saturn. Of these there are 15 groups each, of 
4 planets as follows: 


(1) 

The Sun, Mars, 

Mercury, Jupiter. 

(2) 

v yy 

„ Yenus., 

(3) 

v • y> 

„ Saturn. 

(4) 

91 

Jupiter, Venus. 

(S) 

J» M 

„ Saturn, 

(6) 

n y> 

Venus, 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBIHAT JATARA. 


115 


CH. 11] 


(7) The Sun, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus. 

(8) „ „ „ Saturn, 

(9) „ » Venus, „ 

(10) „ Jupiteii, „ ,* 

(11) Mare, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus^ 

(12) „ „ „ Saturn-. 

(1?) „ „ Venus, „ 

(14) „ Jupiter ' M „ 

(15) Mercury, ,, ,» „ 


Again, of the Bame 6 planets there are six groups eaoh 
of five planets as follows: 

(1) The Sun, Mare, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus. 


(2) 

b » w 

ii. 

Saturn. 

(3) 

»» >> 

Venus 

>x 

(4) 

„ Jupiter 

14 

i> 

(5) 

„ Mercury „ 

II 


(.*) 

Mars* i* 

b 

V 


All the 6 planets form again into one group*. Thus 
there are 22 groups. By the planets of eaoh group aspeo- 
ting the rising sign in its Vargothama position, the number 
of yogas obtained is 22; and by their aspeofciag the Moon in 
its Varguthama position, the number of yogas obtained is 
again 22. According to Mandavya, by eaoh of the 12 signs 
from Aries being either the rising sign or the-sign occupied, 
by the Moon in the oase of each yoga, the number of yo-> 
gas obtained is 44x12 or 528- 

4. When Saturn occupies sign Aquarius, the Sun 
sign, Aries,, the Moon sign Taui'us, Meroury sign Gemini,. 
Jupiter Biga Leo, and Mars sign Scorpio, a person bora 
becomes^ a king when the rising Bign is Aquacius or when 
it is Aries or when it is Taurus- 

Again, when Saturn occupies sign Libra, the Moon 
sign Taurus,, the, Sun and Mercury sign. Virgo,, Venus sign 


Digitized by t^ooQle 


116 


BBIIIAT JATAKA* 


[oh. 9* 


Libra, Mars sign Aries, and Jupiter sign Oanoer, a person 
born becomes a king when the rising sign is Libra or when 
i t is Tanrus. 


5 When Mars occupies sign Capricorn, the Sun and 
the Moon sign Sagittari, Saturn sign Capricorn and when 
the rising sign is also Capricorn, a person born becomes a 
king. 

Again when tbfrrfaing sign is Capricorn and when Mara 
and the Moon occupy it, and when the San occupies, sign 
Sagittari, a person born becomes a king. 

Again when Aries is the rising sign and when the Sun 
occupies it, when Saturn and the Moon occupy sign Libra 
and Jupiter occupies sign Sagittari, a person becomes a king. 

6. When the rising sign is Taurus and the Moon occu¬ 
pies it, when the San occupies sign Leo, Jupiter sign Scropia 
and Saturn sign Aquarius a person born becomes a king. 

Again, when the rising sign is Capricorn, and when 
Saturn occupies it, and when the Moon occupies the 3rd 
house, Mars the 6th house. Mercury the 9th house, and Ju¬ 
piter the 12th house, a person born becomes a viutuous and 
famous king. 

7* When the Moon andi Jupitei occupy sign Sagittari, 
and when Mars occupies the first half of Caprioom, a person 
bron becomes a king when Pisces is the rising sign and Venns 
occupies it or when Virgo is rising sign and Mercury occu-> 
pies it.. 

Again, when the rising sign is Virgo and when Mercury 
ecupies it, when Mars and Saturn occupy the 5th house* 
when the Moon, Jupiter and Venus occupy the 4th.house, a 
person bom becomes a king. 

8. When Pisces is the rising sign, and the Moon occu¬ 
pies it„ and when Aquarius, Capricorn and Leo are respect 




Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BUI HAT JATAKA, 


117 


OH. 1).] 


lively occupied by Satnrn, Mars* and theJSun,a person bom 
becomes a king. 

Again, when Mars occupies sign Aries and Jupiter 
sign Cancer, a person born becomes a king when Aries is 
the rising sign, also when Cancer is the rising sign. 

9. When Cancer is the rising sign and Jupiter occu* 
pies it, and when the Moon* Yenus and Mercury occupy sign 
Taurus and the Sun sign Aries* a person bom becomes a 
powerful king. 

10 When Capricorn is the rising sign and Saturn 
pies ifc> when the signs Aries, Cancer and Leo are ocou* 
pied by their lords and when Gemini and Libra are respec¬ 
tively occupied by Mercury and Venus, a person born be* 
comes a famous king. 

11. When Virgo is the rising sign, and Mercury occu¬ 
pies it, when Venus occupies sign Gemini, the Moon and 
Jupiter,* occupy sign Pisces, and Mars and satum occupy 
sign.Capricorn, a person born becomes a King. • 

12. Persons born under the various yogas described 
above, though they may be born in low families Will be¬ 
come kings. If such persons are bora in a king’s family- 
tliey will doubtless become kings. We shall now proceed 
to describe certain* yogas, persons born under which will 
become kiogs if they belong to a king’s family and will 
become rich if otherwise. 


13* When three or more planets are powerful aud 
occupy either their houses or Exaltation signs or their 
Moolatrikona signs, a person born becomes a king if he 
belongs to a king’s family* 

Again, when five or more planets are powerful and 
occupy their houses or exaltatiou signs or their Moolatri¬ 
kona signs a person born becomes a king even if he be born 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



118 


fitUHA* JATAKA. 


[•OH- 11. 


fti a low-family. If in either ease* the number of powerful 
planets be less than three or five, the persons described 
above will not become kings but will become only rich. 

14. When Aries is the rising sign and the Bun and 
Moon occupy it, when Mars occupies sign Capricorn. 
Saturn sign Aquarins, and Jupiter sign Sagittari, a person 
born becomes a king, if he belong to a king’s family* and 
will become only rich if otherwise. 

Notfes. 

According to another reading, the Sun is made to 
occupy sign Led aud the yoga remains the same in other 
respects. 

15. When Venus occupies the 4th house, and when 
Such house is his own, when the Moon occupies the 9th 
house, and when the other planets occupy the 3rd, 1st and 
11th houses, a person born becomes a king, if he belong to 
a king’s family and only rich if otherwise. 

Notes. 

As Venus is said to be in his Swakshetra he might be 
either is sign Taurus or in sign Libra. The Lagn a must 
therefore be either sign Aquarius or sign Cancer respec¬ 
tively. As the Moon is said to be in the 9th house, he occu¬ 
pies sign Libra in the former case, and sign Pisces in the 
latter, and as the other plants are said to occupy the Srd, 
1st and 11th houses from Lagna, these houses are signs 
Aries, Aquarius uud Sagittari in the one case, and Virgo, 
Cancer, aud Taurus in thef*other. Thus 2 yogas are referred 
to in this stanza. * 

16. When Mercury is powerful and occupies the 
rising • sign, (a) when a benefic planet (6) occupies the 9th 
house(c) and when the other planets(d)oocupy the 9th, 2nd, 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



ch. ll.] jRifcit iiiik a. lli 

3rd, 6th, lOtb, and 11th houses («), a person torn becomes a 
virtuous king if he belokig to a king's family and only rich 
if otherwise. 

Notes. 

(o). This may be any one of the 12 signs* 

(6). This is either Jupiter or Venus. 

(«). The 4th house according to a different reading. 

(d). When one or more of the other planets according 
to commeotator. 

(«). One of these bouses according to commentator. 

17. When Taurus is the rising sign, and the Moon 
occupies it, when Jupiter occupies the 2nd house, Saturn the 
6th house, and the other planets the 11th house, a person 
born becomes a king if he belong to a king's family, and 
only rich if otherwise.. 

Again, when Jupiter oocupies the 4th honse, the Sun 
and the Moon occupy the 10th house, when Saturn occupies 
the Lagna (a) and when the other planets occupy the 11th 
house, a person born becomes a king if he be born in a 
king's family, and only rich if otherwise. 

. Notes. 

(a.) This may be any one of the 12 signs according to 
commentator. 

18. When the Moon oocupies the 10th bouse, Saturn 
the Hth house, Jupiter the rising sign, Mercury and Mars 
the 2nd house, and the Sun and Venns occupy the 4th house, 
a person bom becomes a king if he belong to a king's fa¬ 
mily, and only rich if otherwise. 

Again, when Mars and Saturn occupy the rising sign, 
when the Moon occupies the 4th house, Jupiter the 7th 
house, Venus the 9th house, the Sud the 10th house, and 

16 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



120 


BBIHAT JATAKA. 


[OH. 11* 


Mercury the 11th house, a person) born becomes a king if 
he belong to a king's family, and only rich if otherwise. 

19. Of the planets producing a Rajayoga either in the 
Antardasa periods of those which occupy the 10th house or 
the Lagna (a) or in that of the moat powerful planet ( b ), a 
person obtains kingdom and he loses it and courts the 
friendship of another king in the Antardasa periods of the 
planets occupying inimical or depression signs (c). 

Notes. 

(а) . If there be planets both in the Lagna and in the 
10th house or‘if there be several planets in either, then in 
the Antardasa period of the most powerful of them. 

(б) . If there be no planets both in Lagua and in the 
10th bouse. 

* (c). If such planets be powerful the king will lose bis 
kingdom permanently, and if they be not powerful, he will 
recover it by the help of his allies. 

20. When Jupiter, Venus and Mercury occupy the 
rising sign, (a) when Saturn occupies the 7th house and the 
Sun the 10th house, a person born will live in great comfort 
and luxury, (b) 

Again, when powerful benefic signs form the Kendras 
and malefic planets occupy malefic signs, a person born be¬ 
comes rich and the chief of hunters and robbers. 

Notes. 

(a). The rising sign is Aries according to com¬ 
mentator. The interpretation given of this portion of the 
text is objected to by some on the ground that when Venus 
and Mercury (the inferior planets) occupy the rising sign the 
Sun cannot occupy the 10th house—a place more than 60 
degrees removed from them. For the greatest elongations 
of the two planets from* the Sun are respectively 47 and 29 


L 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BKIHAT JATAKA. 


121 


OH. 12.] ' 


degrees. Accordiugly the following interpretation is pro* 
posed:— 

“ If the rising sign be the house of Jnpiter, Yenna or Meronry” 

Bhatta Utpala, the commentator, while granting the 
validity of the objection, says, that the interpretation objec¬ 
ted to has the support of Garga whom lie quotes. A similar 
remark applies to the Vajra and other yogas described in 
stanza 5 of the next Chapter, and in stanza 6 of the same, 
Varaha Mibira while admitting the impossibility of the 
yoga, says that his task is simply to state the views of the { 
ancient writers and nothing more. Vide notes to stanza 
6, Chapter XII. 

(&). Though he may be poor. 

(c). This portion of the text is interpreted by some 
as follows: 

u When powerful benefio planets occupy the Kendras*’ 

But this interpretation is opposed to Garga whom the 
commentator quotes. 


CHAPTER XII. 

1. On Nabhasa Togas* 

1. Nine, ten and eight, multiplied respectively by 
three, three and fonr give the sums of the numbers of the 
first two, the firs* three, and all the four groups of Nabhasa 
yogas (a). The Yavan&s treat extensively of one thousand 
and eight hundred of such yogas (&). We shall here sum¬ 
marize them. 

Notes. 

(a). Curiously enough the author adopts a rather 
circuitous method of stating the numbers of the several 
groups of Nabhasa yogas. The statement amounts to &u 
Algebraical problem : find 4 numbers such that the 1st + the 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



B,BIHAT JATA^A. 


[OH. 2.1 


122 


2nd=9x3=27.1st+2nd+Srd=l0x8=3Q.lst+2nd.fSrd-i : 
4th=8 X 4=32. It is clear that the number of the last group 
=32—80=2, The number of the 3rd groqp=30—27=8. 
The number of the first and seoond gfroqp is given as 27. 
According to the commentator, the 1st group consists of 
20 yogas and the 2qd of 7. Iu other words what the author 
wants to say is briefly this—The Nabhasa yogas consist of 
4 groups as follows: 

Akriti yogas 20 ; Sankhya yogap 7 ; Asraya yogas, 3 ; 
and D^la yogas 2. 

(b) - Vide note at the end of the Chapter for the 
particulars of the 1800 Nabhasa yogas. 

(c) . The author sayq that his 32 yogas contain the 
1800 yogas of the Yavanas. 

2. According,'to Satyachariyar if all the planets occupy 
(a) the movable, fixed or common signs, the yogas are 
respectively known as Rajju, Masala, and Nala and these 
three form the group of Asraya yogas. Again according to 
Parasara, if the benefio planets ( b ) occupy the Kendras \c)> 
the yoga is known as Srikor Mala; and if malefic planets 

( d ) occupy the Kendras (a) the yoga is known as Sarpa. 
These two form the group of Dala yogas. 

Notes. 

(а) . One or two or three or all the four of the signs. 
According to some tbs planets ought to occupy all the four 
signs. This is opposed to Garga. 

(б) . Yiz., Mercury, Jupiter and Yenus according to 
Garga. 

(c) . Three of the Kendras, while there are no malefic 
planets in any of the keudra houses according to Bada- 
rayana. 

(d) . Yiz:—The San, Mars and Saturn according to 

Garga. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRI^AT 


128 


€8- W.] 


(*). Three of the kendras, while there are no benefio 
planets in any of the kendra houses according to Bada- 
rayons. 

8. Other Astrologers say that the Asraya yogas, are 
identical with the Yava (a), Abja (6), Vajra (c), Atidaja ( d ), 
Gols (c), and the like yogas (f), and that when the effects of 
planets occupying the kendras are desoribed the effects of 
Dal a yogas are also desoribed and they produce no separate 
effect^ (gr). 

Notes. 

In this stanza the author explains the reason why 
certain Astrologers have failed to treat of the Asraya and 
Dala. yogas in their works. 

(a), (6), (c). Vide stanza 6. 

(d) . Vide 8tanza4. 

(e) . Vide stanza 10. • 

(/). The like yogas: such as Sakata (stanza 4), 

Kedara, Sula and yuga (all stanza 10)* 

The Asraya yogas may be these and may not be these; 
hence the author has deemed it advisable to treat them 
separately. For instance, if all planets occupy signs Gemini 
and Sagittari—2 of the common signs—when one of these 
is also the rising sign, the yoga is known both as Vajra aud 
Nala; but if any other sign be the rising sign, it is not a 
Vajra yoga but only a Nala yoga. 

(g). As regards the Dala yogas, it is said that other 
writers have described the effects of benetic and of malefic 
planets occupying the Kendras and as these are also the 
effects of the two Dala yogas they have omitted to treat of 
them separately ,* the author treats of these separately in 
order to make it known that the two are Nabhasa yogas 
and as such their, effects, are felt throughout life, (vide 
Stanza 19)* 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



124 


BKIHAT JATAKA. 


lorn. 12. 


4. If all the planets occupy any two adjacent Kendras, 
the yoga is known as Gada (a). If they all occupy the 
ascendant and the 7th house* the yoga is known as Sakata. 
If all the planets occupy the 4th and the 10tb house the 
yoga is known as Yihaga. If all the planets occupy the 
ascendant, the f»th and 9th houses* the yoga is known as 
Sringataka and if all the planets occupy other triangular 
houses the yoga is known as Hala (fr). 

Notes. 

The author now proceeds to describe the 20 Akrit* 
yogas. 5 of them are described in this stanza. 

(a) . This may be in 4 ways : All the four planets may 
occupy (1)* the 1st and the 4th houses* (-), the 4th and 7th 
houses (3), the 7th and the 10th houses and (4), the 10th and 
the 1st house. The Tavanas consider these 4 as four dis¬ 
tinct yogas and call them respectively as Gada* Sankha, 
Yibbuka and Dwaja. (Vide note at the end of the Chapter.) 

(b) . This may be in three ways : all the planets may 
occupy* (1)* the 2nd* 6th and 10th houses* (2)* the Sd* 7th 
and 11th houses* (3) the 4th* 8th and 12th houses. 

5. If the benefic planets occupy the ascendant and 
the 7th house while the malefic planets occupy the 4th and 
lOth houses the Yoga is known as Yajra * and if the reverse 
be the case (a) the yoga is known as Yava. Again* if all the 
planets occupy the four Kendras the yoga is known as 
Kamala* and if they occupy the four Panapbara (6) or 
the four Apoklima(c) houses* the yoga is kuown as Vapi. 

Notes. 

In this stanza* 4 more Akriti yogas are described. 

(a) . That is if the malefic planets occupy the ascen¬ 
dant and the 7th house while the benefic planets occupy 
the 4th and 10th houses. 

(b) . That is the 2nd* 5th* 8th and 11th houses. 

(c) . That is the 3rd* 6th* 9th and 12th houses. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



1BIHAT JATAXA- 


125 


ch. 12.] 


* 6. I have described the Vajra and other (a) yogas 
adopting the view of former writers (5). How can Mercury 
and Venus occupy the 4th sign from the Sun (c)?- 

Notes. 

(a). 'That is the Vava yoga and the yoga mentioned 
in the beginning of stanza 20, of the Chapter on Rajayogn. 

(5). Maya, Yavana, Garga and others. 

(c). According to Mr. Sundareswara Srouty of Trivadi, 
the Vajra and Yava yogas refer to the positions of the pla¬ 
nets in the Bhava Chakra snd not to their positions in their 
Rasi Chakra as supposed by Varaha Mihira. He is there¬ 
fore of opinion that Garga and other writers have not erred 
in treating of these yogas as possible ones. This we shall 
now expluin: 


Varaha Mihira says u How can Mercury and Venus 
occupy the 4th sign from the Sun’ 9 The word used in the 
text is Bhavana which means a sign of the Zodiac (vide 
stanza 4, Chapter I). If the Vajra and Yava yogas refer to 
the positions of the planets in the Rasi Chakra then Varaha 
Mihira is right in declaring that the ancient writers have 
erred, but not if the yogas refer to the positions of the 
planets in the Bhava Chakra. Indeed in all yogas where 
the positions of the planets are stated with reference to 
particular Bhavas or houses from the ascendant, they refer to 
Bhava Chakra. As it is somewhat tedious to construct this 
Chakra (table), most of the astrologers confound it with the 
other Chakra and wrongly apply aU yogas to the Rasi 
Chakra. This is one of fruitful sources of error in astrologi¬ 
cal predictions; we shall now explain what is meant by 
Bhava Chakra. For the process of constructing it, the 
reader is referred to the Appendix at the end of the Book. 

Both Rasi and Bhava Chakras are divisions of the eclip¬ 
tic ; the former is division into 12 equal parts and the latter 


t 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA. 


126 


[ou. 12. 


{B division into 12 unequal parts depending upon thi lati¬ 
tude of the place. 

Bkaskara Charyur defines Bhara Chakra as follows in 
his Gola Adhyaya: 

i 

*r«rairfaf?r?rfa*iVrr^ ii 

<< The point where the eoliptic cots the horizon in the 
east is known as eastern or rising Lagna, and in the west as 
the western or setting Lagna, and the points where the 
meridian of the place cuts the ecliptic are known as 
Madhya or middle Lignas.—The 10th and 4th L&gnas.” 

These 4 points are respectively the middle points of the 
1st, 7th, 10th and 4th Bhavas. The two points of trisec¬ 
tion of the distance between the middle points of the 1st 
and 4th Bhavas are respectively the middle points of the 
2nd and 3rd Bhavas. The two points of triseotion of the , 
distance between the middle points of the 4th aud 7th 
Bhavas are respectively the middle points of the 5th and 
6th Bhavas. The two points of trisection of the distance 
betweeu middle points of the 7th and 10th Bhavas are the 
middle points of the 8th and 9th Bhavas. And the two 
points of trisection of the distance between the middle 
points of the 10th and 1st Bhavas are the middle points of 
the 11th and 12th Bhavas. Thus we have obtained the 
middle points of the 12 Bhavas. Now if we bisect these 
twelve divisions of the ecliptic, the space between the two 
. points of bisection immediately on both sides of the middle 
point of each Bhava will form a Bhava. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



co. 12.] 


BEIHAT JATAKA. 


127 


Now as the ecliptic is inclined to the equator by about 
23 degrees, the pole of the ecliptic will always be removed 
from the pole of the equator by about 23 degrees and will 
describe round it a circle iu the course of e» oh day. So 
that every day the plane of the ecliptio meridian will 
coincide with the plane of the meridian of the place twice. 
Now the poiufc where the ecliptic meridian bisects the eclip¬ 
tio is known in Astronomy as the noua-gesiraal point- Cali 
this point N. Call the point where the meridiau cuts the 
ecliptic A£ and the points where the horizon cuts the ©clip; 
tio in the east and west as E and W respectively. 

W-----B 

ML N 

So that N E = N W = 90 degrees = 8 signs, and 
M E is always 3 bhavas and M W is also 3 bhavas> M being 
the middle point of the 10th Bba?a. 

Now when the plane of the ecliptic meridian coincides 
with the plane of the meridian of trie place, N coincides 
with M and therefore N M vanishes and the Rasi and 
Bhava Chakras coincide. This will occur twice a day. 
At other times they will differ. Now in the higher lati* 
fades the angle between the two meridian lines increases. 
V{idi3 Spherical Trigonometry). Therefore the distance 
N M also increases and M W accordingly diminishes and it 
may even become less than 47 and 27 degrees, and it never¬ 
theless contains 8 bhavas. So that it is possible for Mer- 
cury and Venus to occupy M (the 10th bhava) while the 
Sun occupies W (the 7th bhava), t. e. f Venus and Mercury 
may occupy the 4tii bhava from the San. So that Garga 
and othnr writers have not erred if the Vajra and Ya/a 
yogas refer to the positions of the planets in the Bhava 
Chakra. 

7. If all the planets occupy the four signs (a) from 
the ascendant, the yoga is knowu as Yupa; if they 

10 


Digitized by 


Google 


A 



128 


BB1HAT JATAKA. 


[OH. 12. 

ocoupy the fonr signs (V) from the fourth house, the yoga 
is known as Ishu or Bana; if they occupy the four signs (c) 
from the seventh house, the yoga is known as Sakti; and 
if they occupy the four signs from the 10th house the yoga 
is known as Danda. 

Notes. 

In this stanza the author describes four more Akriti 
yogas. 

(a) . That is the ascendant and the 2nd, 3rd and 4th 
houses. 

(b) . That is the 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th houses. 

(c) . That is the 7th, 8th, 9th and 10th houses. 

(d) . That is the 10th, 11th and 12th houses and the 
ascendant. 

8* If, as before, all the planets occupy the seven 
signs (a) from the ascendant the yoga is known as Nau ; 
if they occupy the seven signs ( b) from the fourth house, 
the yoga is known as Kuta ; if they occupy the seven 
signs (c) from the seventh house, the yoga is known as 
Ohhatra ; and if they ocoupy the seven signs (d) from the 
tenth house the yoga is known as Chapa. Again if all the 
planets occupy the seven houses beginning.from a Pan- 
phara or Apoklima house, the yoga is known as Ardha- 
Chandra (ej. 

Notes. 

In this stanza, the author describes 5 more Akriti 
yogas. 

(a) . That is, the 1st, 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 5th, 6th and 7th 
houses. 

(b) . That is from the 4th to the 10th house. 

(c) . That is from the 7th to the 12th house and the 
ascendant. 


Digitized by 


Google 



OH. 12.] 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


129 


(d) . That is from the 10th to the 12th house and 
from the ascendant to the 4th house. 

(e) As there are 4 Panaphars and 4 Apoklima bouses 
the Ardha-Chandra yogas are of 8 kinds : viz., all the 
planets may occupy (1) from the 2nd to the 8th house, (2), 
from the 3rd to the 9th house, (3), from the 5th to the 11th 
house, (4), from the 6th to the 12th house, (5), from the 8th 
to the 2od house, (6) from the 9th to the 3rd house, (7), 
from the 11th to the 5th house, (8), from the 12th to the 
6th house* 

i 

9* If the planets (a) occupy the six alternate signs (5 ) 
beginning from tbe'2nd house the yoga is known as Sama- 
dra, and if they occupy the six alternate signs (e) begin* 
ning from ascendant the yoga is known as Chakra. Thus 
the Akrita yogas have been described briefly* 

Notes. 

In this stanza the author describes th9 remaining 2 
(out of 20) Akriti yogas* 

(a). All the seven planets. 

(5). That is, the 2nd, 4th, 6th, 8th, 10th and 12th 
houses* 

(e) That is the 1st, 3rd, 5th, 7th, 9th and lltb houses. 

10* If all the planets occupy any seven signs the yoga 
is known as Vallaki; if they occupy any six signs, the yoga 
is known as Damini ; if they occupy any five signs it is 
known as Pasa,* if any four signs, it is known as Kedara; 
if any three signs it is known as Sula ; if any two signs, it 
is known as yuga; and if they’ocoupy a single sign, the yoga 
is known ns Cola. When any of theso Saukhya yogas are 
at the same time any other Nabhasa yogas, they ave to be 
treated as belonging to the latter class (a). 


j 


Digitized by Tooele 



180 


BBIHAT JATAKA. 


[OH- 12. 


Notes. 

(a). For instance the Qada, Sakata and Vihaga yogas 
described in stanza 4 are to be treated only as such and not 
as Yuga yogas described in this stanza; theSringutaka and 
Hala yogas described in stanza 4 are to be treated only as 
such and not as Sula yogas described in this stanza. Again, 
the Vajra, Yava, Kainala and Yapi yogas described in 
stanza 5 as well as the Yupa, Ishu, Sakti and Danda yogas 
described in stanza 7 shall not be confounded with the 
Kadara yogas described in this stanza. And so on. 

11. A person born uucler a Rajju yoga will be jealous 
of the wealth of others, will proceed to foreign lauds and 
will be fond of travelling; a person born under a Musala 
yoga will be respectable, rich, and will engage in various 
undertakings; and a person born under a Nala yoga will 
be of defective organs, settled views, rich and skilled in 
work. Again, a person born under a Srik yoga will live in 
comfort and luxury, and one born under a Sarpa yoga, will 
be miserable in many ways. 

Notes. 

In this stanza ) the author describes the effects of the 
three Asraya yogas and of the two Dala yogas. 

12. If the Asraya yogas partake at the same time of 
the character of other yogas they should be treated as the 
latter; otherwise they produce the effects described for 
them. 

Notes. 

This subjeot has already been discussed in stanza 8. 
For instance, if a R»jju yoga or a Musala yoga or a Nala 
yoga partake of the nature of a Kamala yoga (stanza 5) it 
should be treated as the latter. 

13. A person born under a Oada yoga will perform 
sacrificial rites, will be rich, and will ever be engaged in the 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAJCA. 


131 


OH* 12.] 


acquisition of wealth; a person born under a Sakata yoga 
will live by means of carts, will be afflicted with diseases, 
and will have a mean wife; a person born under a Vihaga 
yoga will live by carrying messages, will be fond of travels, 
and will ciuse quarrels ; a person born under a Sringataka 
yoga will be happy in the latter end o£ life (a) and a person 
born under a Hala yoga will till lands* 

Notes. 


In this stanza the author describes the effects of 5 
Akriti yogas. 

(a). The word in the text is * ( Chira Sukhi.” This is 
interpreted by some to mean " happy for a long time.” 
This interpretation is opposed to Garga. 

14, A person born under a Vajra yoga will be happy 
both at the beginning and end of life, will be a general 
favorite and will be bold in a fight. A person born in a Yava 
yoga will be powerful, and will be happy at the middle of 
ife. A person born under a Padma (Kamala) yoga will be 
of great renown, will be greatly happy and possessed of 
many attainments. A person born under a Yapi yoga will 
live in poor comfort for a long time, will bnry his wealth 
under ground and will be a miser. 


Notes. 

In this stanza, the author describes the effects of 4 
more Akriti yogas. 

15. A person born under a Ynpa yoga will be liberal in 
gift and will perform high sacrificial rights. A person 
born under a Bana (Ishu) yoga will indulge in torture, will 
be a jailor and will make arrows. A person born under a 
Sakti yoga will engage in deeds disgraceful to his rank in 
life, will not be skilled in work, and will be without money 
and oomfort. A person bom under a Danda yoga will be 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRITIAT JATAKA* 


lo2 


[oh. 12. 


separated from persons of his affection (a) and will earn his 
livelihood by the lowest of means, viz., servitude. 

Notes. 

In this stanza the author describes the effects of 4 
more Akriti yogas. 

(a). Sons and the like. 

16. A person born under a Nan yoga will be of wide¬ 
spread fame, happy only now and then, and wilLbe a miser. 
A person born under a Kuta yoga will indulge in lies, and 
will be a jailor. A person born under'a Chhatrn yoga will 
make his people happy and will live in comfort in the latter 
end of life A person b.orn under a Chapa yoga will delight 
in fight and will live in comfort both at the beginning and 
end of life. 

Notes. 

The effects of 4 more Akriti yogas are described in this 
stanza. 

17. A person bom under an Ardha-Chandra yoga will 
be a general favorite, of agreeable person and be respected 
by all. A person born under a Samudra yoga will be as 
prosperous as a king and will live in comfort. A person 
born under a Chakra yoga will have his feet illumined by 
the lastre of the gems in the crowns of kings falling pros* 
trate before him by way of respect and submission (a). A 
person boru in a Yallaki yoga will be skilled in work and 
will delight in mtisio and dunce. 

Notes. 

In this stanza the author describes the effects of the 
three Akriti yogas and of the first S&nkhya yoga. 

(a). In other words he will become an emperor or 
king of kings. 

18. A person born under a Damini yoga will be liberal 
in gift, will delight in helping others and will possess many 
cows. A person born in a Pasa yoga will, with his servants 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 


BRIHAT J AT AKA. 


133 


CH. 12.] 


and kinsmen, Barn wealth by proper means- A person born 
under a Kedara yoga will till lands, and by doing good deeds, 
will be useful to others. A person born under a Sula yoga 
will be bold in fight, will receive blows and will be fond of 
money (a) but will be poor. 

Notes. 

In this stanza the author describes the effects of l more 
Sankhya yogas. 

(a). €< Will be fond of torture ” according to some 
other reading. 

19. A person born under a Yoga yoga will be poor and 
will act in contravention of V«dic rules. A persou born 
under a Gola yoga will be poor, dirty, ignorant, addicted to 
low deeds, unskilled in work, and will ever be wandering 
from place to place (a). Thus have been been described 
the several Nabbasa yogas with their effects. These effects 
are felt throughout a man’s life. 

Notes. 

In this stanza the effects of the remaining two Sankhya 
yogas are described. 

(a). For bare subsistence,according to commentator. 

(i). Except in the case of Vajra and other yogas (t ride 
stanza 14) whose effects will be felt, as stated, in particular 
periods of a person’s life. So that where ver no periods 
are mentioned the effects will be felt throughout life. 


Notes:—Dala Yogas will coincide neither with Asraya 
yogas nor with Akriti yogas. They might coincide with 
Sankhyayogas—with the Vallaki, the Damioi, the Pasa, or 
the Kedara yogas, in which case the yogas are to be treated 
as only Dala yogas and not as Sankhya yogas. {Vide 
stanza 10). Again, according to stanza J2 if the Astaya 
yogas coincide with other yogas, they cease to be Asraya 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



134 


BRIHJLT JATAKA. 


[OH. 12. 


yogas and according to stanza 10 if the Sankhya yogas 
coincide with other yogas, they oease to be^Sankhya yogas. 
Now suppose Asraya and Sankhya yogas to coincide with 
each other. Are they to be treated as the former or as the 
latter? The commentator says that if the coincidence 
refers to the Kedara, Sula, and Yuga yogas, the yogas are 
to be treated as Asraya yogas only; but if it refer to the 
Gcia yoga, it is to be treated as such and not as an Asrya 
yoga—otherwise there will be no room for Gola yoga at alb 

We shall now explain how the Ya van as obtain 1800 
Nabhasa yogas. As stated in stanza 3, the Yavanas do not 
treat of the three Asraya yogas and the two Data yogas. 
They treat of 23 Akriti yogas and 127 Sankhya yogas or 
1?0 yogas in all for a Lagna ; there being 12 Lagnas, the 
number of Nabhasa yogas treated of by the Yavanas is 
12X150=1800. 


We shall explain these more fully. As explained in 
note (a) to stanza 4, the Gada yoga of the author is treated 
of as 4 distinct yogas by the Havanas. Adding these to the 
remaining 19 Akriti yogas, we get 23 Akriti yogas as 
treated of by the Yavanas. 

Again, the seven Sankhya yogas of the author are split 
into 127 Sankhya yogas (for a Lagna) by the Yavanas as 
follows: The first Sankhya yoga treated of by Yaraha 
Mihira is known as Yallaki yoga according to which the 
7 planets might occupy any seven sigus. This may be 
in many ways ; but the Yavanas select only a few : as euoh 
of the seven planets might occupy the Lagna the number 
of yogas under this division is 7. Again the 2nd Sankhya 
yoga treated of by the author is one according to which 
the 7 planets are said to occupy any six signs. This may be 
in mauy ways; but the Yuvaua$ select the following few; 
of the 7 planets 5 may occupy 5 houses and two more may 


Digitized by 


Google 



CH. 13.] 


BRIHAT JATAXA. 


] 35 

occupy the Lagna. These two may be any two of the 
seven planets. The number of yogas under this head will 
be the number of combinations of 7 things taken 2 
together =1x4=21. 

Again, the 3rd Sankhya yoga is one in which the seven 
planets occupy 5 houses. This may be in many* ways $ but 
the following are selected:—4 planets occupying 4 houses 
and 3 more occupying the Lagna. These three may be 
any three out of the 7 planets* The number of cases 
under this head is the nnmber of combinations of 7 things 
taken 3 together = 2 x 4 x 4 = 86 . 

The next Sankhya yoga of Varaha Mihira is similarly 
split by the Yavanas into 4 x 4 x 4 x 4 = 35 , and the next into 
t x 4x4x Jx£= 21, and the next into 4x4x4x4x£xf=7, 
and the last into 4 x 4 X 4 X Jx 4 x | X|=1. So that the seven 
Sankhya yogas are split into 7 + 21 +35 + 35421-1-741= 
127. These added to 23 Akriti yogas give ns 150 yogas 
for a Lagna or 1800 yogas for the 1*2 Laguas. 

To find the number of combinations of n things taken 
r at a time, the reader is referred to the Lilavati of Bhas- 
kara Cbaryar or to the Chhandas Sutra of Pingala or to 
Chapter 77, stanza 22 (notes) of the English Translation of 
Brihat Sambita or to the notes to stanza 4 of the next 
Chapter of this Book. 

CHAPTER XIII. 

On Chandra (Lunar) Yogas. 

1. The conduct, wealth, knowledge, intelligence and 
skill of a person will be poor, moderate or excellent accord¬ 
ing as the Moon occupies the Kendra, the Panaphara or 
the Apoklima houses from the Sun (a), and a person will be 
rich and will 'live in comfort if the Moon occupy his own 
Navani8a or an Atimitra Navainsa (5), provided she is 

17 


Digitized by ejOOQle 


B BIHIT JATAKA. 


186 


[OH. 18. 


aapected by Jnpiter if the birth occur by day, and by 
Yenns if the birth oocur by night. 

Notes- 

(a) . At the time of birth. In other words, a person 
will have very little of these qualities if the Moon oocupy 
either the sign oooupied by the Sun or the 4th, 7th or 10th 
sign from it. He will have these qualities in a moderate 
degree if the Moon oconpy the 2nd, f>tb, 8th or 11th sign 
from the sign occupied by the Sun; and he will have these 
qualities in a large measure, if the Moon occupy the 3rd, 
6 th, 9th or 12th sign from the sign occupied by the Sun. 

(b) . An Atimitra Navamsa is a Navamsa of an 
Atimitra or a very friendly planet. 

2. If the benefio planets (a) occupy the 6th, 7th and 
8 th houses from the Moon, the yoga is known as Adhi- 
yoga (6). A person born in the yoga will become a gene¬ 
ral, a minister or a king ( c) and will be in the enjoyment of 
great pleasures and wealth with subdued enemies and long 
life and free from diseases and fear, 

(а) . These are Meroury, Jupiter and Venus. 

(б) . The yoga is of 7 sorts according as the benefio 
planets occupy one or more of the three houses: (1), They 
might occupy all the three houses ; (2), or the 6th and 7th 
houses j (3) or the 6th and 8th; (*) the 7th and 8th, (5), 
the 6th; (6) the 7th; (7), the 8th houses from the Moon. 

(c). According as Mercury, Jupiter and Venus are 
weak, of moderate power, or of very great power according 
to Badarayana. 

In the Astrological work known aa Saravali, the Adhi 
yoga is classed with Baja yoga when the planets Mercury, 
Jupiter and Venus are not Astangata planets, nor aspected 
by maleiio planets. Mandavya is of the same opinion. 


i 


Digitized by t^,ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA. 


137 


CH. 18.] 

3« Excepting the Son if the other planets occupy the 
2 nd, the 12th, or both the 2nd and the 12th houses from 
the Moon, the yoga is .respectively known as Sunapha, 
Anapha or Durndhnra ; otherwise (o), the yoga is known 
as Kemadruma by numerous writers. According to some (Z>), 
if the Moon occupy the Kendra house from the ascen¬ 
dant or if the Moon be accompanied by a planet, the yoga 
ceases to be a Kemadruma yoga. According to others (c) 
the three yogas, Sunapha, Anapha and Durudhura are re¬ 
ferred to the Kendra bouses from the Moon (d), while again 
some others (e) refer the three yogas to the houses on both 
sides of the sign the Navamsa of which the Moon occu¬ 
pies (f). But these views are not considered as authori¬ 
tative. 

Notes. 

(а) . Otherwise: i. 6., if the 2nd, the 12th, or both the 
2nd and the 12th houses from the Moon be not occupied by 
planets—the Sun excepted. 

(б) . Qarga and Parasara. 

(c) . Srutakeerti and others. 

(d) . That is, if the planets excepting the Sun occupy 
the 4th house from the Moon, the yoga is known as Suna¬ 
pha; if they occupy the 10th house from the Moop, the 
yoga is known as Anapha, and if they occupy both the 4th 
and the 10th house from the Moon, it is known as Duru- 
dhura and if the 4th and 10th houses from the Moon be not 
occupied by planets, the yoga is known an Kemadruma. 

(e . * Jeevasarma. 

(f). Suppose the Moon to occupy the Navamsa of 
Sagittari in sign Aries. Now if the planets, excepting 
the Sun and the Moon occupy the 2nd, or the 12th or both 
the 2nd and the J 2th houses from sign Sagittari the yoga 
is respectively known as Sunapha, Anapha and Durudhura. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



198 


BKIHAT JATAK1. 


[on. 13. 

bat if these two houses bo not so occupied the yoga is 
known as Komadruma. 

4. The Sunapha and the An^pha yogas are each of 
thirty-one sorts, and the Durudhura yogas are of one hun¬ 
dred and eighty sorts, as will be found to be the case by 
forming series as described in the rule for finding the num¬ 
ber of ootnbin&tious of a given number of things. 

Notes. 

The rule for finding the number of combinations of a 
given number of things is only hinted at in the text, but 
not fully given. It is quoted in stanza 22 of Chapter 79 of 
the Brihat Samhitta. The rule is :— 

“ Beginning from unity, form a series by adding to¬ 
gether the first figure with the next and the sum with the 
next figure and so on omitting only the last. From the 
series thus formed, form a fresh series similarly, beginning 
from unity, and so on. The last terms of the several series 
will give the number of combinations required.” 

Suppose there to be 7 substances. The figures 1, 2, 8, 
4, 5, 6, 7, will form the first series. Obtain the 2nd series 
as follows: 1+2=3; 3+3=8; 6+4=10; 10+5=15; 
15 f 6=21. The 2nd series therefore is 1, S, 6, 10, 15, 21 • 
Obtain the 3rd series as follows: 1 + 3=4; 4+6=10; 
10+10=20; 20+15= 55. The $rd series therefore is 1,4,10, 

20, 35. Obtain the 4th series as follows : 1+4=5; 5 + 10 
=15; 15+20=35. The 4th series therefore is 1,5,15, 
35. Obtain the 5th series as follows: 1+5=6. 6+15= 

21. The 5th series therefore is 1,6,21. Obtain the 6»h 
series as follows: 1 +-6=7• Tho 6th series therefore is 1, 
7. The seventh series is 1. The last terms of tho seven 
aeries are, 7, 21, 35, 35, 21, 7, 1. These are respectively 
the number of combinations of seven things taken 1,2, 3, 
4, 5, 6 and 7 at a time. Bhaskara Chariar gives a simpler 
process in his Lilavati—a work on Arithmetic. He says • 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHA.T J1T1KA.. 


€H«. 13.] 


139 


Form fractions with the numbers beginning from the 
last number to unity for numerators and with the numbers 
beginning from unity to the last number for denominators 
respectively. The number of combinations taken 1, 2, 
3 , 4, &c., at a time will respectively be the first fraction, 
the product of 1st two fractions, of the first three fractions 
or of the 1st four fractions, &c. Suppose, for instance, the 
number of things to be 7- Then the fractions ars h 
b b t- The number of combinations of 7 things taken 
one at a time=x=7» Taken two at a time^Xl—^l, taken 
3 at a time=^Xf X£X=85; taken 4 at a tim e=^X$X*x£ 
=35; taken 5 at a time=jX^X£,x Jx£=21; taken 6 at a 
time =|X|X|XJX^X|=7; and taken 7 at a time 

=TXiX$XiX*X#Xy=]. 

Now in the Sunapha or Anapha yogas the 2nd or the 
12 th house from the Moon may be occupied by the five 
* planets from Mars either singly or two at a time or three or 
four or all at a time. The number required is the number 
of combinations of five things taken 1, 2, 3,4 and 5 together 
at a time. This is to be deduced from the following: £, f, 
|, £, + The number will be found to be 5+10+10+5+1 
=31. 


Take the casein which the 2nd house from the Moon 
is occupied by a single planet; while it does so, the 
remaining four planets may occupy the 12th house from the 
Moon 1, 2, 3 and 4 at a time. The number of these will be 
the sum of the number of combinations of four things 
taken 1, 2, 3 and 4 together. This will he found to be 4-r6 
+ 4+1=15. So that for one of the five Sunapha yogas we 
get 15 Pnrudhura yogns. The five Sunapha yogas of one 
planet will therefore give us 5x15=75 Durudhura yogas. 
Take one of the 10 Sunapha yogas of two planets from 
Mars to ?aturn; the remaining 3 planets may occupy the 
12 th house from the Moon, 1, 2 and 3 at u time. The num- 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



140 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


[oh. 13. 

ber required is the sum of the number of oombinations 6f 
three things taken 1, 2 and 3 at a time. This will be found 
to be* 3 + 3+1=7. Combining these with the 10 Sunapha 
yogas of 2 planets we shall get 10X7=70 Durudhura yogas. 
Similarly the 10 Sunaptm yogas of three planets will give 
10x3=30 Durudhura yogas; and the five Snnapha yogas 
of 4 planets will give us 5x1=5 Durudhara yogas. So 
that the number of possible Durudhura yogas=75-f70-f-?0 
+5=180. 

5. A person born in a Sunapha yoga will be possessed 
of self-acquired property, will be a king or will resemble 
a king, and will be a man of intelligence, wealth and 
renown! 

A person born in an Anapha yoga will be a man of 
influence and authority, will be free from diseases, will 
have a oontrol over his passions, will be of great renown> 
will be in the enjoyment of all manner of pleasures, will 
wear neat dress and will be free from grief. 

6. A person bom in a Durudhura yoga will be in 
the enjoyment of all manner of pleasures, will be possessed 
of wealth and chariot, will be liberal in his gift and will 
have good servants. 

A person born in a Kemadruma yoga, though he may 
belong to a king’s family, will be dirty, afflicted with grief, 
will do deeds not suited to his rank in life, will be poor, 
will serve under others and will be wicked. 

7. If the yoga planet be Mars, the person will be 
active, fond of fight, and wealthy, and will engage in 
deeds without thought. If the yoga planet be Mercury, the 
person will be skilled in work, will be of good speech aud 
learned iu the arts (a). If the yoga planet be Jupiter, a 

person will be wealthy and virtuous, will live for ever in 
comfort and will be respected by the king. If the yoga 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT J AT AKA. 


141 


OH. 18 .] . 


planet be Venus, a person will be afflicted with sexual pas¬ 
sion, will be very wealthy and in the enjoyment of all man¬ 
ner of pleasures. 

Notes. 

(a). In music, dance, painting, &c. 

8. If the yoga planet be Saturn, a person will enjoy 
the wealth, property and servants of others, will engage in 
various deeds and will be the chief of parties of men (a). 
It the birth occur by day, the Moon will bring on misery 
if she occupy the visible hemisphere, and will bring oh 
prosperity if she occupy the invisible hemisphere; if other¬ 
wise, the results will be the reverse of these (b); 

Notes. 

(a) . If two or more planets be yoga planets the 
effects described for them all will come to pass. 

(b) . That is, if the birth occur by night, the Moon 
will bring on misery if she occupy the invisible hemisphere 
and prosperity if she occupy the visible hemisphere. 

9. If all the benefio planets (a) occupy the Upachaya 
places (b) from the ascendant at the time of birth, a person 
will be very rich and if they occupy the Upachaya places 
from the Moon, he will be moderately rich. If two of the 
planets occupy the Upachaya places a person will be 
moderately wealthy and if one of them occupy such places 
he will possess small wealth (o). Even if the person be 
bom in other malefic Yogas (d) the present yoga will take 
effect to their exclusion (e). 

Notes. 

(a) . Mercury, Jupiter and Yen us* 

(b) . The hrd, 6th, 10th aud 11th houses from the 
ascendant. 


(c). Or poor. If beuefic plauets occupy the Upachaya 
places both from the ascendant and from the Moon a person 
will be exceedingly rich. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



142 


BRIHAT J AT AKA. 


[OH 14. 


( d ). Such as Kemadruma yoga. 

(a). That is, suppose a person to be bom in a«Eenna« 
drama yoga and suppose the benetio planets to occupy the 
Upachaya places from the ascendant or the Moon or both, 
the person will become rich and not poor. 


CHAPTER XIV. 

On Double Planetary Togas. 

1. If at the time of birth the Sun and the Moon occu¬ 
py together a sign of the Zodiac, the person born will be a 
maker of fire engines (a) and will work in stones; if the 
Sun and Mars occupy a sign together, the person Jwill be 
addicted to sinful deeds; if the Suu and Mercury occupy a 
sign together, the person will be skilled in work, will bo 
intelligent and famous, and will live in comfort; if the Sun 
and Jupiter occupy a sign together, the peYson will be 
cruel and will work for other men ; if the Sun and*'Venus oc¬ 
cupy a sign together the person will gain money by 
® n g A ging in public sports and by the use of weapons, and if 
the Sun and Saturn occupy a sign together, the person 
will be skilled in metal work and in earthen-ware. 

Notes. 

(a). Engines of destruction according to Commentator. 

2. If the double p1anets*occupying together a sign of 
the Zodiao at the time of birth be the Moon and Mars the 
person will earn money by the t sale of works of art, of 
women, of liquor, and of pots and will give trouble to his 
mother; if they be the Moon and Mercury, the person will 
be of sweet speech, skilled in literary interpretation And 
will become popular and famous; if they be the Moon and 
Jupiter, the person will defeat his enemies, jwill be an im¬ 
portant person in his faroity, will not be of firm views and 
will be greatly rich; if they be the Moon and Venus, the 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



DRIHAT J AT AKA.; 


143 


«fc. l4r.] 

person will be skilled in cloth work (a); if they be the Mooii 
and Saturn, the person will be the son of a re-married 
woman ( b). 

Notda. 

(a) . In weavings stitching, dyeing* buying and selling 
cloths. 

(b) . The Sanscrit term for the woman is Punarbhu. 
She is said to be a woman, who, out of sexual passion, 
quits her husband and marries a person of her o^il caste 
whether or not she may have joined in sexual union. 

3. If the double planets occupying together a sign of 
the Zodiac at the time of birth be Mars and Mercury, the 
person will deal in roots and the like, in oil, in works of art 
and will be skilled in duels ; if they be Mars and Jupiter, 
the person will be the chief of a town or a king, will 
acquire money or will be a Brahmin ; if they be Mars and 
Venus* the person will protect cows, will engage in duels, 
will be skilled in work, will indulge in sexual union with 
the wives of other men and will be a gambler; if they bO 
Mars and Saturn, the person will be afflicted with grief,* 
will be a liar, and will be despised by others. 

4. - If the double planets occupying together a sign of 
the Zodiac at the time of birth be Mercury and Jupiter, the 
person will be skilled in duels, will be fond of music and 
learned in dauce; if they be Mercury aud Venus the person 
will be one of good speech, and will be a ruler over countries 
and over men * if they be Mercury and Saturn, the person 
will be skilled in deceiving others, and will reject the 
advice of his preceptor; if they be Jupiter and Veuus, the 
person will be learned in some respectable department of 
knowledge, will possess wealth, a wife and various virtues ; 
if they be Jupiter and Saturn, the person will be a barber, 
a potman or a cook. 

19 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



144 


BUI HAT JATAKA. 


[OH. 14 . 

5. If the double planets occupying together a sign of 
the Zodiao at the time of birth be Venus aud Saturn, the 
person will be short-sighted, will have an inorease of wealth 
through the friendship of a young woman, and will be skilled 
in writing and painting. In the case of other planetary 
yogas, (a) the effeots described shall be determined and 
applied. 

Notes. 

(a). That is, if three or more planets occupy together 
a sign of the Zodiao at the time of birth, the yoga shall 
first be split into a number of double planetary yogas and 
the effeots described in this Chapter shall then be applied. 
t.g. Suppose the four planets, the Sun, Moon, Mars and 
Mercury to ooonpy together a single Bign. This yoga can 
be split into six double planetary yogas as follows: (1), The 
Sun and the Moon, (2), the Sun and Mars, (8), the Sun and 
Meroury, (4), the Moon and Mars, (5), the Moon and 
Meroury, (6), Mars and Mercury. The effects described for 
each shall be determined and applied. 

Notes.—The following yogas referring to the several 
groups of 2, 8, 4, 5 and 6 planets occupying together a 
single sign of Zodiao at the time of birth are taken with 
their effects from a work known as Jataka Parijata. 

I—Of two Planets. 

If the yoga planets oocupying a single sign be 

(1) . The Sun and the Moon, the person will be subject 
to the influence of women, will be skilled in work, and will 
be of bright appearance. 

(2) . The Sun and Mare, he will be a strong man, a 
liar and a sinner. 

(3) . The Snn and Mercury, he will be learned, beau¬ 
tiful, strong and of fixed views. 


Digitized by t^,ooQle 



[CH. 14 BR1H1T JATAKA. 14$ 

(4) . The Sun and Jupiter, he will be earnest in work, 
will be a favorite with the kingand rich. 

(5) . The Sun and Venus, he will acquire wealth 
through women, will have kinsmen and enemies and will bo 
intelligent. 

(6) . The Sun and Satnrn, he will be of dull under¬ 
standing and subject to his enemies. 

(7) . Moon and Mars, be will be bold and bom of a 
high family; will be virtuous, wealthy and possessed of 
good qualities. 

(8) . Moon and Mercury, he will be charitable, learned 
in scienoes, and possessed of excellent qualities. 

(9) . Moon and Jupiter, he will protect' good and pious 
men and will be very intelligent. 

(10) . Moon and Yenus, he will be a sinner and a 
Merchant. 

(11) * Moon and Saturn, he will possess a bad wife, 
will ill-treat his father and will be poor. 

(19). Mars and Mercnry, he will be of good speech 
and learned in medioine, arts and soiences. 

(18). Mars and Jupiter, he will be of strong sexual 
passion, will possess excellent qualities and will be a mathe¬ 
matician. 

(14) . Mars and Venus, he will be fond of fight and of 
the world, and will be deceitful. 

(15) . Mars and Saturn, he will be litigious, fond of 
musio and of a dull understanding. 

(10). Mercury and Jupiter, he will be of good speceb, 
beautiful and very rich. 

(17). Mercury and Venus, he will be a ruler over 
countries and over men. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



146 BJU11AT JATAKA. [Cfl. l4. 

(18) . Mercury and Saturn, he will bo deceitful, and 
-will not be open to the advice of his preceptor. 

(19) . Jupiter and Venus, he will be of bright appear¬ 
ance, a favorite with the king, will be very intelligent and 
skilled in work. 

(20) . Jupiter and Saturn, ho will be a sculptor and 
will protect cows. 

(21) t Venus and Saturn, will be skilled in duels. 


II.—OP TH11EB PLANETS. 

Again, if the Toga planets occupying a single sign be 

(1) . The Sun, thoMoon and Mars—the person will 
destroy the family of his enemy, will be rich and just. 

(2) . The Sun, the Moon and Mercury, he will resemble 
a king and will be learned and famous. 

(3) . The Sun, Moon and Jupiter, he will be possessed 
of many good qualities and will be learned. 

(4) . The Sun, Moon and Venus, he will commit 
adultery, will be oruel, will be subject to fear from his enemy 
and will be rich. 

(5) . The Sun, Moon and Saturn, he will be a man 
of wrong views, will be deceitful and will travel to foreign 
lands. 

(6) . The Sun, Mars and Mercury—he will be without 
enjoyment of any kind and will lmvo sons, wealth and wife. 

(7) . The Sun, Mars apd Jupiter, he will be fond of 
sexual enjoyment, will be considerate, will be a commander 
of armies or a magistrate. 

(8) . The Sun, Mars and Venus, he will be afflicted 
with diseases of the eye, will live in comfort and born in a 
good family. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA. 


347 


00. 14.] 


(9) . The Sun, Mars and Saturn, he will be separated * 
from his kinsmen, will be dumb, will suffer from diseases 
and will be rich. 

(10) . The Sun, Mercury and Jupiter, he will be of 
sound views, will be learned* wealthy and famous. 

(U). The Sun, Mercury and Venus, he will be of 
soft body, will be learned and famous and will live in 
comfort. 

(12). The Sun, Mercury and Saturn, he will be with¬ 
out kinsmen and poor ; will hate mankind and will be of 
vicious habits. 

(18). The Sun, Jupiter and Venus, he will possess a 
good wife and children, will be very intelligent, will suffer 
from diseases of the eye and will be rich. 

(14) . The Sun, Jupiter and Saturn, he will be fearless, 
will be liked by the king and will be of quiet and excellent 
disposition. 

(15) . The Sun, Venus and Saturn, he will be of bad 
reputation and will be haughty and insolent. 

(16) . The Moon, Mars and Mercury, he will be glut¬ 
tonous, will be addicted to wicked deeds and will abuse 
other people. 

(17) « The Moon, Mars and Jupiter, he will bo of 
angry speech, will bo of strong sexual passion and will be 
beautiful. 

(18) . The Moon, Mars and Vonus, he will be of bad 
conduct, will have no sons and will be fond of travels. 

(19) . The Moon, Mars and Saturn, he will be virtuous 
and wealthy, will have a bad wife and will be litigious. 

(20) . The Moon, Mercury and Jupiter—he will be 
charitable and learned in sciences, will protect good *,and 
pious men and will be of good speech. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



148 


BBIHAV JATAKA. 


[oh 14. 

(2^). The Moon, Mercury and Venus—will be learned, 
will be addicted to low deeds and will have numerous ser¬ 
vants. 

(22) . The Moon, Mercury andSaturn—will be liberal in 
gift, will be respected by the king and will be possessed of 
good qualities. 

(23) . The Moon, Jupiter and Venus-will be intelligent, 
will have good sons and will be skilled in works of art. 

(21). The Moon, Jupiter and Saturn—will be learned 
in soiences, will be fond of old women and will be as happy 
as a king. 

(25) . The Moon, Venus and Saturn—will be learned in 
the Vedas, will be the king’s chaplain and will be liked by 
all people. 

(26) . Mars,Mercury and Jupiter—will be fond of music, 
of Vedas, of literature and of drama. 

( 27 ) . Mars, Mercury and Venus—will be of defective 
organs, will be born of a bad family and will be of settled 
views. 

(28) . Mars, Mercury and Suturn—will serve nnder 
other men, will suffer from diseases of the eye and will be 
fond of travels. 

(29) . Mars, Jupiter and Venus—will be liked by the 
king, will have good sons, and will live in comfort. 

(30) . Mars, Jupiter and Saturn—will be of thin body, 
without comfort, respectable and given up to a vicious 
course of lifo. 

(81.) Mars, Venus and Saturn-will have bad sons and 
will ever be of pure mind. 

32. Mercury, Jupiter and Venus—will conquer over 
his enemies and will be of wide-spread fame. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA. 


CH. 14. J 


149 


S3. Mercury, Jtupiter and Saturn—will live in great 
comfort^ will be wealthy and will be attached to his wife* 

34. Mercury^ Venus and Saturn—will tell lies. 

35. . Jupiter, Venus and Saturn—will be of clear 
understanding and will be happy and famous. 


III.—OF FOUB PLANETS. 

Again, if the yoga planets occupying together a sign 
of Zodiac at the time of birth be 

(1) . The Sun, Moon, Mars and Mercury—the person 
will be deceitful, skilled in the art of writing and will suffer 
from diseases. 

(2) . The Sun, Moon, Mars and Jupiter—will be rich, 
famous, intelligent and liked by the king and will be free 
from diseases and from grief. 

(3) . The San, the Moon, Mars and Venus—will have 
a wife and children, will be learned, a moderate eater, 
happy, skilled in work and meroifnl. 

(4) . The Sun, Moon, Mars and Saturn—will suffer 
from diseases of the eye, will be fond of travels and of 
prostitutes and will be poor. 

(6). The Sun, Moon, Mercury and Jupiter—will have 
eight sons, will be rich and possessed of good qualities; 
will be famous, powerful and liberal in gift. 

(6) . The Sun, Moon, Mercury and Venus—will be of 
defective organs and of good speech. 

(7) . The Sun, Moon, Mercury and Saturn—will be 
poor and ungrateful- 

(8) . The Sun, Moon, Jupiter and Venus—will be 
possessed of many good qualities, will commit adultery 
with other women, will be intelligent and will suffer from 
diseases of the eye. 


Digitized by t^,ooQle 



150 


BfilHAT JAJAKAt 


[Off. 14; 

(9) . The Sun, Moon, Jupiter and Saturn—will be 
fond of travels, will be rich, intelligent and attached to 
prostitutes. 

(10) . The Sun, Moon, Venus and Saturn—will be of 
defective limbs, will be timid, will follow girls and will be 
fond of wealth and meals. 

(11) . The Sun, Mars, Mercury and Jupiter—will be 
strong, will get into difficulties! will be married and rich, 
will suffer from diseases of the eye and will be fond of 
travels. 

(12) . The Sun, Mars, Mercury and Venus—will be 
fond of the wives of other men, will be of fearful eyes and 
appearance, will be addicted to thieving and will be weak. 

(18). The Sun, Mars, Mercury and Saturn—will be a 
commander of armies or a minister, will be addicted to low 
deeds and will bo in the enjoyment of numerous pleasures. 

(14) . The Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Venus—will be as 
famous as the king, will be respected everywhere and will 
be rich. 

(15) . The Sun, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn—w'll be 
blind, will be a wauderer and will have friends find kins¬ 
men. 

(16) . The Sun, Mars, Venus and Saturn—will suffer 
disgrace, will be slothful aud possessed of good qualities. 

(17) . The Sun, Mercury, Jnpiter and Venus—will be 
very rich and famous. 

(18) . The Sun, Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn—will 
briug about quarrels, will be respectable and of vicious 
habits. 

(19) . The Sun, Mercury, Venus and Saturn—will be 
of good speech, will be truthful, will be a man of prinoiplo 
and will bo of good conduct. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAIA. 


161 


ch. 14.] 

(20) . The Sun, Jupiter,Wenus nnd Saturn—will be 
learned in arts, will be the chief of low people and will bo 
obstinate. 

(21) . The Moon, Mars, Mercury and Jnpiter—will be 
liked by the king, will be a minister or an eminent poet. 

(22) . The Moon, Mars, Mercury and Venus—will 
have a good wife and sons, will be intelligent, will be ugly 
and deformed and will live in comfort. 

(23) . The Moon, Mars, Mercury and Saturn—will 
have double parents, will be bold and will bave several 
wives and childreu. 

(24) . The Moon, Mars, Jupiter and Veons—will do 
sinful deeds will indulge in sleep nud will be fond of money. 

(25) . The Moon, Mars, Jupiter and Saturn—-will be 
of firm views, bold, happy and learned. 

(2G). The Moon, Mars, Venuaand Saturn—will be of 
bad cooduot, will have no sons, will be learned in tbe 
Vedas or will be the king’s priest. 

(27) . The Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus—will 
be very rich, attached tti his kinsmen and virtnous. 

(28) . The Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Satnm—will 
be liberal in gifts, will be respected by the king will live iu 
great comfort, will be wealthy and attached to bis wife. 

(29) . The Moon, Mercury, Venus and Saturn—will be 
hated by the people and will be fond of the wives of other 
men. 

(30) . The Moon, Jupiter, Venns and Saturn—will be 
without sons, will not be earnest in work and will be 
without mercy. 

(31) . Mars, Morcury, Jupitor and Venus—will be rich 
and despised by the people 

20 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



152 BRIHAT JATAKA. [CH. H 

(32) . Mars, Mercnry, Jupiter and Saturn—will suffer 
from diseases and will be poor. 

(33) . Mars, Mercury, Yenus and Saturn—will be of 
defective limbs, will serve under other men, will tell lies 
and will have bad sons. 

(84). Mars, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn—will be liked 
by the king, will be of thin body, will have bad sons and 
will be of clear understanding. 

(35). Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn—will be 
very rich, learned, and of good conduot. 


IV. OF FIVE PLANETS. 

Again, if the yoga planets ocoupying together a sign 
of Zodiac at the time of birth be 

(1) . The Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury and Jupiter—the 
person will engage in fight, will be deceitful and skilled in 
work. 

(2) . The Snn, Moon, Mars, Mercnry and Venus—will 
be devoid cf charity, will be earnest in work, will be with¬ 
out kinsmen and will work for other men. 

(3) . ■ The Sun, Moon, Mars, Mercury and Saturn—will 
be of short life, will be fond of earning money and without 
wife and ohildren. 

(4) . The Sun, Moon, Mars, Jupiter and Venus—will 
delight in annoying other men, will be rejeoted by his 
parents anb kinsmen and will be of defective eyes. 

(o). The Sun, Moon, Mars, Jupiter and gaturn—will 
be avaricious and will be afflicted with grief owing to sepa¬ 
ration from his wife. 

(6). The Sun, Moon, Mars, Venus and Satnrn—will 
be wealthy, powerful, able and dirty and will covet the 
wives of other men. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATJLKA. 


153 


CH. 14.] 


(7> The San, Moon, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus— 
will be a minister, will be rich, successful, famous and 
powerful and will also be a magistrate. 

(8) . The Sun, Mood, Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn— 
will depend on othor meu for meals, will be timid, will 
commit sins and will engage in fearful deeds. 

(9) . The Sun, Moon, Mercury, Venus and Saturn— 
will be poor, tall, without sons and sickly. 

(10) . The Sun, Mood, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn— 
will be without a wile, of good speech, will have enemies 
will be fearless and learned in jugglery. 

(11) , The Sun, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus— 
will be without grief, a good friend and master of horses 
and covet the wives of other men. 

(12) . The Sun, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn— 
will beg his meals, will be dirty and dressed in ragged 
clothes. 

(13) . The Sun, Mars, Mercury, Venus and Saturn— 
will be an important person aud will be afflicted with grief, 
fear, disease and hunger. 

(14) . The Sun, Mars, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn— 
will be respeoted everywhere, will be rich, will be blind 
and will have friends and kinsmen. 

(15) . The Sun, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn— 
will possess a knowledge of Atma, will do deeds acceptable 
to Devas and to his preceptors aud will be learned in 
sciences. 

(16) . The Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Venus 
—will be of a mild disposition, happy, rich, powerful and 
learned. 

(17) . The Moon, Mars, Mercury, Jupiter and Saturn 
—will be skilled in engineering, will be of strong physique 
and will be famous for his skill in work. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



154 


BB1HAT J AT AKA. 


Lch. 14 

(18> The Moon, Mars, Mercury, Venus and Saturn— 
will have a good wife and sons, will be intelligent and wi 11 
live in comfort. 

(19) . The Moon, Mars, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn— 
will work for other men, will be poor, of dirty appearance, 
ignorant and addicted to thieving. 

(20) . The Moon, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn 
—will be respected in all lands, will be of defective limbs, 
will be a minister and will resemble a king. 

(21) . Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, Venus and Saturn—• 
will be respected eveiywhere, will be skilled in work, will 
suffer from torture, imprisonment and disease. 


V.—OF SIX PLANETS. 

Lastly, if the yoga planets occupying a single bign of 
Zodiac at the time of birth be the several planets except 

(1) . Saturn—the person will be a writer of scientific 
works, will dwell in woods and mountains and will be 
possessed of a wife, sons and wealth. 

(2) . Except Venus—will bo addicted to thieving, will 
covet other women, will be despised by his kinsmen, will 
be without sous, will be a fool and will travel to foreigu 
lands. 

(3) . Except Jupitei—will be a nun of low birth, will 
work for other men, will suffer from consumption and will 
be despised by the people. 

(4) . Except Mercury—will be a minister, will be 
possessed of a wife, sous, wealth and comfort and will have 
a control over his passions. 

(5) . Except Mars—will suffer from headache, will be 
mad, will live in places unfrequented by man and will 
travel to foreigQ lands. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 15-3 % 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


155 


(6) . Except the Moon-will be an energetic traveller 
and intelligent. 

(7) . Except the Sun—will visit holy’places, and will 
be rich. 


CHAPTER XV. 

On Ascetic Yogas. 

1* A person born when four or more (a) powerful ( b) 
plauets occupy a single sign of the Zodiac becomes an 
asoetic of the Sakya, Ajivika, Bhikshuka, Vridhasravaka, 
Chakra, Nirgrandha or Vanyasana class according as the 
most powerful planet of the group is Mars, Mercury, Jupiter, 
the Moon, Venus, Saturn or the Sun. (c) If such powerful 
plauet be one that has suffered defeat in conjunction at the 
time of birth, the ascetic will, after a time revert to his 
previous condition of life. 

Notes. 

(a). That is 5,6 or 7 planets. 

(5). If no planet be powerful there will be no Pravri- 
jia (ascetic yoga). 

(c). The ascetic life of the most powerful planet will 
be embraced by the person first, then that of the planet next 
in power and bo on. The first chango of lifo will occur in tho 
Dasaand Antardasa period of the most powerful plauet; the 
succeeding chauges will occur in the Antardasa periods of 
the respective planets. If the yoga planet be a single power¬ 
ful planet which does not suffer defeat in conjunction, the 
ascetic life assumed will continue till death. We shall now 
explain the terms referring to the several classes of ascetics. 

(1) . Sakya:—A Budliisfc ascetic dressed in red robes. 

(2) . Ajivika:—A Jain ascetic; the term includes 
Vaishnava ascetics as well. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 


156 BMHAT J AT AKA. [oil. 15. 

(S). Bhikshu :—A Brahman ascetic who abandons his 
house and family and subsists entirely on alms. 

(4) . Vridhasravka :—known as kapalika, a follower 
of Siva. 

(5) . Chakra s—known as Chakradhara, is an ascetio 
who wears a discus. 

(6) . Nirgrandha :—a naked ascetic. 

(7) . Vanyasana :—an ascetic who subsists on the roots 
of the forest and is engaged in Divine meditation. 

2. If the most powerful yogo planet be an Astangata 
planet, (a) a person will not become a Deekshita ( b ) but will 
be attached to persons who are such. Again, if the power¬ 
ful planet which suffers defeat in ooiyunction be aspeoted 
by other planets, a person will not become a Deekshita (c) 
but will possess a strong desire to become one. 

Notes. 

(a> This has already been explained. 

(fc). That is, one of the holy order of men. 

(c). If not aspected, he will become one, and after a 
time revert to his former condition of life as stated in the 
last stanza. 

3; If the lord of the sign occupied by the Moon as¬ 
pects Saturn and be not aspeoted by any other planet, (a) 
or if Saturn aspect the lord of the sign occupied by the Moon 
when such lord is not powerful, (b) a person will become an 
ascetic. Again, if the Moon occupy the Drekkaua of Saturn 
and the Navamsa of Saturn or Mars and be aspected by 
Saturn, (c) a person will become an ascetio (d). 

Notes. 

(a). The Pravrijia will be that of such lord or Saturn 
whichever is powerful. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAXA. 


167 


CH. 16.] 

(6). The Pravrijia will be that of Saturn. 

(c)* And not aspected by any other planet. 

(d> The ascetio life will be that described for Saturn. 

4. A person born when Jupiter, the Moon and the 
rising sign are aspeoted by Saturn, when Jupiter occupies 
the 9th house from the ascendant and under one of the 
Raja yogas becomes a scientific author, (a). Again, a 
person bom when Saturn occupies the 9th house from the 
ascendant and is not aspected by other planets and under a 
Raja yoga will become both a king and an ascetic* (6). 

Notes. 

(a). If the horoscope contain a Raja yoga and an 
ascetic yoga, the former will not take effect, but the latter 
will; such for instance as the liyes of Yaraha Mihii a, Eanada, 
Budha, Panohasikha, Brahma Gupta and others. If the horos¬ 
cope contain two Raja yogas and an ascetio yoga, the person 
will become a king—such as Janaka, Easiraja, Suchidhwaja 
and others. 

(5). If the horoscope contain no Raja yogas but only 
the ascetic yoga described in the text, the person will be¬ 
come an ascetio. 


CHAPTER XVI. 

Oh Thb Nakshatras. 
or 

The Moon In The Asterisms. 

1. A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Aswini will be fond of ornaments, will be of 
fioe appearance, will be popular, skilled in work and intelli¬ 
gent. 


Digitized, by 


Google 



158 


BR1HAT JATAKA. 





u 


<> 




A 

• c \ 


[oh. 16. 

A person bom when the Moon posses through the 
asterism of Bh&rani will be successful at work, truthful, free 
from diseases, able and free from grief. 

2. A person born when the .Moon passes through the 
osterism of Krittika will bo a glutton, fond of the wives of 
other men, of bright appearance and of wide-spread fame. 

A person born when the Moon passes through the as- 
terism of Rohini will be truthful, will not covet the property 
of other men, will be of cleanly habits, of sweet speech, of 
firm views, and of fine appearance. 

8. A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Mrigasirsha will be of no firm principles, will 
be able, timid, of good speech, of active habits, rich and 
will indulge in sexual pleasures. 

A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Ardra will be insincere, of irascible temper, 
ungrateful, troublesome and addicted to wicked deeds. 

4. A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Punarvasu will be devout and of patient habits 
will live in comfort, will be good-natured, quiet, of wrong 
views, sickly, thirsty and pleased with trifles. 

5. A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Pushya will have a control over his desires, will 
be generally liked, learned in the Sastras, rich and will b e 
found of acts of charity. 

A person bom when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Aslesha will not be attentive to the work of 
other men, will be a promiscuous eater, will be sinful, un¬ 
grateful and skilled in cheating other men. 

0. A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Magha will have numerous servants, will wor¬ 
ship the Devas and Pitris and will be engaged in important 
works. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 1C ] 


BR10AT JATAKA. 


159 


A person born when the * Moon passes through the as- 
terism of P. Phalgnni will be of sweet speech, will be liberal 
in his gifts, of wandering habits and will serve under kings* 

7. A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterisni of U. Phalguui will be generally liked, will earn 
money by his learning aud will live in comfort. 

A person born when th© Moon passes through the ns- 
tcristn of Hasta will be of active habits, full of resources, 
shameless, merciless and a thief and a drunkard. 

8. A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Chittra will wear cloths and flowers of various 
colors and will have beautiful eyes and limbs. 

A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Swati will be of a mild and quiet nature, will 
control his passion, will be skilled in trade, will be merci¬ 
ful, unable to bear thirst, of sweet speech and disposed to 
do acts of charity. 

9. A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Visakha will be jealous of another’s prosperity, 
will be a niggard, of bright appearance, of distinct speech, 
skilled in earning money and disposed to bring about quar¬ 
rels among men. 

A person born when the Moon passes through the as¬ 
terism of Anuradha will be rich, will live in foreign lands, 
will be unable to bear hunger and disposed to wander from 
place to place. 

10. A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Jyeshta will have few friends, will be very 
cheerful, virtuous, and of irascible temper. 

A person born wheu the Moon passes through the as¬ 
terism of Moola will be haughty, rich, happy, not disposed 
to iujtiro other men, of firm views and will live in luxury. 

21 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



160 


BRIHAT J AT AKA. 














[ch. 16 . 

11. A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of P. Ashadha will have an agreeable wife, will be 
proud and attached to friends. 

A person born when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of U. Ashadha will be obedient, will be learned in 
the rules of vir;u3, will posses many friends, will be grate¬ 
ful and return favors received and will be generally liked. 

12. A person born when the Moon passes through 
the astorism of Sravana will be prosperous and learned, 
will have a liberal-minded wife, will be rich and of wide¬ 
spread fame. 

A person born when the Moon passes through the as¬ 
terism of Dhanishta will be liberal iu gifts, rich, valient, 
fond of musio and will be a niggard. 

13. A person boru when the Moon passes through the 
asterism of Satabhishak will be harsh in his speech, will be 
truthful will suffer grief will conquer his enemies, will 
thoughtlessly engage in work and will be of independent 
ways. 

A person born when the Moon passes through the as- 
ter ism of P. Bliadrapada will sulfur from grief, will place 
his wealth at the disposal of his wife, will be of distinct 
speech, will be skilled in earning money and will be a 
niggard. 

14. A person born when the Moon passes through 
the asterism of U. Bliadrapada will be an able speaker, will 
be happy, will possess children and grand-children will con¬ 
quer his enemies and will be virtuous. 

A person born when the Moon passes through the as¬ 
terism of Revati will possess perfect limbs, will be liked by 
all the people, will be deeply learned, will never covet the 
property of other men and will be rich. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 17 .] 


BBIHAT JATAXA.’ 


161 ' 


Notes. 

The effects described above will fully come to pass* 
only if the Moon be powerful. 


CHAPTER XVII. 

On Thk Moon In Tni Sivbral Signs of 
This Zodiac. 

1- A person born with the Moon in sign Aries will 
have ronnd red-eyes, will be fond of vegetable food and 
will eat hot meals but in a moderate degree ; will be of a 
quickly relenting nature, will be fond of travels and of 
soxual union; will be of strong knees; will possess no 
permanent wealth; will be fond of fight and of women; 
will be [skilled in befriending other men; will have dis¬ 
figured nails and a wounded head ; will be haughty, will be 
the eldest of his brothers; will have lines in his hand of 
the shape of the weapon known as Sakti ; will be fickle-min¬ 
ded and will be afraid of water. 

2. A person born with the Moon in sign Taurus will 
be of fine appearance and of beautiful gait; will possess 
large thighs and face ; will possess marks ou his hack, face 
and sides, will be liberal iu liis gifts ; will bear misfortuues; 
will possess great influence and authority; will have a 
large hump on the neck ; will have daughters; will suffer 
from phlegmatic affections, will be separated from, his 
kinsmen, wealth and sons; will be of ngreeable manners 
and of patient nature; will be a grent eater; will be fond 
of women; will be attached to his friends and will be hap¬ 
py both when young and old. 

3. person boru with the Moon in sign Gemini will be 
fond of women, will be skilled in sexual union ;will possess 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



1C2 


BUIIIAT JATAKA. 


[cu. 17# 

red eyes; will be learned in the Sastras; will carry messages; 
will possess curling hairs and a sharp intellect; will be skill- 
ed in wit, in discovering the thoughts of other men and in 
game; will possess beautiful features; will be of sweet speech; 
will be a great eater; will be fond of music> and skilled in 
the rnles of dance; will join in sexual union with herma¬ 
phrodites; and will possess an elevated nose. 

4. A person born with the Moon in sign Cancer will 
possess a bent body ; will walk fast; will have a high hip ; 
will be subject to the influence if women; will have an 
excellent friend ; will be learned in Astrology ; will have 
numerous houses, will have a wealth which will increase 
and decrease as the Moon; will be short; will possess a 
thick neck; will be capable of being won over by kind 
words, will be attached to his friends and will bo fond of 
water and forests* 

5 # A person born with the Moon in sign Leo will be 
of irascible temper, of large cheeks, broad face and brown 
eyes; will have very few sons ; will hate women; will be 
fond of animal food, forests and hills; will continue angry 
at trifles for a long time ; will bo afflicted with pains caused 
by hunger, thirst, belly-ache, toofch-ache as well as purely 
mental anxieties ; will be liberal in his gifts ; will be bold 
in fight; will be of fixed principles; will be haughty and 
attached to his mother. 

6* A person born with the Moon in sign Virgo will,out 
of modesty, be of mild and beautiful eyes and gait; will have 
his shoulders and arms sunk or depressed; will live in com- 
forti will be of soft body ; will be truthful, will be skilled in 
dauce, music and painting; will be learned in the Sastras; 
will be viituous and intelligent, will be fond of sexual union; 
will enjoy the house and property of other meu; will live 
in foreign lands; will be of sweet speech; and will have 
daughters and very few sons. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRI0AT JATARA. 


163 


CH. 17.] 

7- A person born with the Moon in sign Libra will res¬ 
pect the Devas, Brahmins, and holy men ; will bo intelligent f 
will never covet the property of other men; will lead a reli¬ 
gious life; will be subject to the influence of women ; will be 
tall; will have a raised nose ; will be of thin and defective 
limbs and fond of travels; will be rich; will be a trader; 
will bear the name of a Deva coupled with an excellent sur¬ 
name granted by a body of learned men ; will bo sickly ; 
will protect his family and will be disgraced and rejected 
by his kinsmen. 

8. A person born with the Moon in sign Scorpio will 
have broad eyes, a broad breast and round shanks, thighs 
and knees; will be separated from his parents and preceptors; 
will be afflicted with diseases when young; will borospoctod 
by kings, will of brown color; will not be of a straight¬ 
forward nature ; will have lines in his hand and feet of the 
shape of the fish, the Vajrayudka or a bird ; and will end¬ 
eavor to conceal his sins. 

9. A person bom with tlio Moon in sign Sngitbari 
will have a long face and neck ; will inherit bis father’s 
property; will be liberal in his gift; will be a literary 
author; will be powerful and skilled iu speech ; will have 
large teeth, ears, lips aud nose, will engage in numerous 
works ; will be skilled in sculpture; will have indistinct 
shoulders, disfigured nails and large bauds; will be of a 
deep and inventive intellect, will be a man of right under¬ 
standing ; will bate bis kinsmen ; will never yield to compul¬ 
sion bub only to kind treatment. 

10. A person born with the Moon in sign Capricorn 
will be ever attached to bis wife and children ; will do 
deeds of virtue; will lmve thin lower limbs, good eyes and 
a thin waist; will be open to advice; will be of amiable 
manners and slow at work ; will not bear cold ; will be of a 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



164 


. BTUHAT JATAKA. 


[CH. 17 

wandering nature, powerful and a literary author; will be a 
niggard and will be attached to old women of low caste ; 
will be shameless and merciless. 

11. A person born with the Moon in sign Aquarius 
will have a neck like that of the Came], a body covered with 
muscles, rough and covered with hair; will be tall; will 
have large legs, thighs, back, buttocks, face, and lower 
belly; will be deaf; will be attached to the wives of other 
men and interested in the w'cked deeds of other people ; 
will rise and fall by turns ; will de fond of flowers and per¬ 
fumes; and will be attached to friends aud will walk with¬ 
out fealiug tired. 

12. A person born with the Moon in sign Pisces will 
be a dealer in the produce of the sea and a trader in general; 
will be fond of his wife aud clothes ; will have perfect 
limbs, a bright body, long nose and large head, will put his 
enemies into disgrace, will be subject to the influence of 
women, will have beautiful eyes, and will be fair, rich, happy 
and learned. 

13. If at the time of birth of a person, the Moon, tho 
sign occupied by the Moon and the lord of such sign be all 
powerful the effects described in this chapter will fully come 
to pass (a); the same remark applies to planets other thau 
the Moon (6). 

Notes. 

(а) . If two of tho three be powerful, the effects will 
como to pass imperfectly ; if only one of the three bo power¬ 
ful, they will come to pass still more imperfectly and if 
none of the three be powerful, the effects will fail. 

(б) . This refers to the next chapter in which the 
author describes the effects of the various planets occupy¬ 
ing the several Bigns of zodiac at the time of birth. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



OH. 18] 


BRIHAT J AT AKA. 


165 


CHAPTER XVlir. 

On The Sun, Mars And {Other|Planbts 
In the Several Signs of Zodiac. 

1. A person born with the Snn in Aries but not in its 
exaltation degree (a) will be of wide-spread fame, able, of 
wandering habits, possessed of small wealth and will carry 
weapons. 

A person born with the Sun in . sign Taurus will deal 
in cloths, perfumes and other articles, will hate women and 
will be skilled in music. 

Notes. 

(a). A person born with the Snn in the exaltation 
degree will be very rich, will remain for ever in a place, will 
have servants carrying arms, will be of great fame and able, 

2. A person born with the Sun, in sign Gemini will 
be learned iu grammar, will be an Astrologer and will be 
rich. 

A person born with the Sun in Cancer will be independ¬ 
ent, fierce, poor, will do the work of other people and will 
suffer from the fatigue of foot-journey. 

A person born with the Sun in sign Leo will be fond 
of living in forests, mountains and cow-sheds, will be 
powerful and will be a fool. 

A person born with the Sun in sign Virgo will bo skill¬ 
ed in writing, paintiug, in literary productions and in mathe¬ 
matics, and will possess a body resembling that of a woman. 

8. A person born with the Sun in sign Libra will be 
fond of liquor or will manufacture it^ will be of a wandering 
nature, will be an alchemist and will do wioked deeds. 

A person born with the Sun in sign Scorpio will be of 
a fierce nature, will thoughtlessly engage in work, will earn 
money by aots connected with poison and will be vastly 
learned in the use of arms. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



1G6 


BUI HAT JATAKA* * 


[ch. 13. 

A person bom with the Sun in Sagitari will be respec¬ 
ted by sages, will be rich and independent and will be 
learned in medicine and sculpture. 

A person born with the Sun in sign Capricorn will 
engage in deeds unsuited to his rank in life, will be igno¬ 
rant, will deal in mean articles, will possess small wealth, 
will be avaricious uud will enjoy the property of other men* 

A person bora with the Sun in sign Aquarius will 
engage in deeds unsuited to his rank in life, will be poor 
and will have no sous. 

A persn born with the Sun in sign Pisces will become 
rich by dealing in the produce of water, will bo respected 
by women, will possess a mole or other marks in the part 
of body corresponding to the sign occupied by the Sun and 
Moon together. 

5. A person born witlio Mars in sign Aries or Scorpio 
will be respected by the king,will bo of a wandering nature* 
will be a commander of armies or a trader, will be rich, will 
have a body marked with wounds, will be a thief and will 
be in ilie enjoyment of ilio pleasures of the senses. 

A person born with Mars in sign Taurus or Libra will 
be subject to the influence of women, will not be open to 
the advice of friends, will be fond of the wives of other men, 
will be learned in the games of magic, will adorn his per¬ 
son, will bo of a timid nature and will have a rough body, 

6. A person born with Mars in sign Gemini or Virgo 
will bo of bright appearance, will have sons and no friends, 
will help others, will be skilled in music and tight, will be 
a niggard, and will be fearless and of a begging nature. 

A person born with Mars in sign Cancer will be rich, 
will cross seas and earn wealth, will bo of defective limbs 
and will bo wicked* 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA. 


167 


OH. 18.] 

7. A person bom with Mars in sign Leo*will be poor, 
will patiently bear afflictions* will wander in the forests, 
will be fearless and will have few wives and children. 

A person born with Mars in sign Sagittari or Pisoes 
will have many enemies* will be the^king’s minister* will be 
of wide-spread fame* will be fearless and will have very few 
children. 

A person born with Mars in sign Aquarius will ever 
suffer grief, will be poor, will wander from place to place* 
will be a liar* will be independent and wicked. 

A person 1 born with Mars in sign Capricorn will be 
very rich, will have manjr sons and will be a king or will 
resemble a king. 

8. A person bom with Mercury in sign Aries or 
Scorpio will be fond of gambling, of running into debt and 
of liquor* will be an atheist, will argue against the spirit 
of the S tstras* will be a thief* will be poor* will have a 
mean wife, will be deceitful, will be a liar and will swerve 
from the path of rectitude. 

A person born with Mercury in sign Tanrus or Libra 
will be a preacher, will have many sons and wives, will 
ever be engaged in earning money* will be liberal in gift 
and will respect his preceptor- 

9- A person born with Mercury in sign Gemini will 
be talkative* will bo a liar will bo learned in the sciences, 
in music* in dance and iu painting; will be of sweet speech 
and will live in comfort. 

A person born with Mercury in sign Cancer will earn 
money by works connected with 1 water and will be disliked 
by his kinsmen. 

10. A person bora with Mercury in sign Leo will be 
disliked by women, will be poor, will have neither comfort 
nor sons, will wandet from place to place* will be ignorant, 
will be fond of women and will suffer disgrace. 

22 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



16S 


BUHA.T J1TAKA- 


[OH. 18. 

A person born with Meroury in sign Virgo will be 
liberal in gift, will be learned, will possess inany virtues, 
will live in comfort, will be of a patient uature, will lie 
ingenious land fearless. 

11. A person bom with Meroury in sign Capricorn 
or Aquarius will work for other men, will be poor, will be 
a sculptor, will run into debts and will work for no fees. 

A person born with Mercury in sigh Sagitt&ri will be 
respected by kings, will be learned in soienoes and in laws. 

A person born with Mercury in sign Pisces will be 
skilled in befriending other meo, will readily discover the 
views of other people, and will be learned in the handicraft 
of men of low castes. 

12. A person bom with Jopiter in sign Aries or 
Scorpio will be a commander of armies, will be very rich, 
will have many wives and ohildren, will be liberal in gift, 
will have good servants, will be of a patient nature, and of 
bright Appearance, will be happy with his wife and will be 
of great fame. 

A person born with Jupiter in ■sign Taurus or Libra 
will be free from diseases, will live in comfort, will be rioh, 
will have friends and sons, will be liberal in gift and will 
be liked by all. 

A person born with Jupiter in sign Gemini or Virgo 
will have many clothes, houses, servants, sons and friends, 
will be a minister and will live in co mfort. 

1$. A person born with Jupiter in sign Canoer will be 
possessed of gems, sons, wealth, wives, influence, intelligence 
and oomfort 

A person born with Jupiter iu sign Leo will be all that 
has been said in tho case of a person born with Jupiter in 
Canoer and will besides be a commander of armies. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



<m. 18.] 


BEIHAT JATAKA. 


169 


A person born with Jupiter in sign Sagittarlor Pisces 
will be the ruler of a province or a minister under a king 
or the commander of armies or will be very rich. 

A person born with Jupiter in sign Aquarius will be all 
that, has been said in the case of a person born with the 
Moon in sign Cancer. 

A person born with Jupiter in sign Capricorn will do 
deeds disgraceful to his rank in life, will possess very little 
wealth and will be afflicted with grief. 

14. A person born with Venus in sign Aries or 
Scorpio will be fond of the wives of other men, will lose his 
property through their influenoe and will bring disgrace on 
his family. 

A person born with Venus in sign Taurus or Libra will 
acquire wealth by his own powers, will be liked by the 
king, will be an important person among his kinsmen, will 
be a man of fame and will be fearless. 

15. A person born with Venus in sign Gemini will do 
the work of a king, will be rich and learned in music* 

A person born with Venus in sign Virgo, will engage 
in hard work. 

A person born with Venus in sign Capricorn or Aqu- 
rius will be liked by all, will be subject to the influenoe of 
women and will be fond of bad women. 

16. A person born with Venus in sign Cancer will have 
two wives, will be a beggar, will be timid and haughty and 
will suffer grief. 

A person born with Venus in sign Leo will acquire 
money through women, will have an excellent wife and very 
few sons. 

A person born with Venus in sign Sagittari will be 
possessed of excellent qualities and will be rich. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



m 


2BIBAT JATAKA. 


[oh. 18. 

A person born with Venus in sign Pisces will be learn¬ 
ed, will bo a man of authority, will be rich, will be respect¬ 
ed by the king and will be liked by all. 

17. A person born with Saturn in sign Aries will be 
a fool, will wander from place to place, will be a fop and 
will bo separated from his friends. 

A person born with Saturn in sign Scorpio will suffer im 
prisonment, will receive blows, will be indifferent to work 
and will be mercUe&s. 

A person born with Saturn in sign Qemini or Virgo 
will be shameless, will suffer grief, will be poor, will have no 
sons, will be a bad painter, will be a constable and will be 
a chief officer. 

18. A person born with Saturn in sign Taurus will be 
fond of women of low caste, will possess small wealth and 
will have several wives* 

A person born with Saturn in sign Libra, will be the 
chief of a party of men in a town or in an army or in a 
village and will be rich. 

A person born with Saturn in sign Cancer will be 
poor, will have very few tooth, will be separated from his 
mother and will have no sons. 

A person born with Saturn in sign Leo will not be 
deserving of respect, will suffer grief, will have no sons and 
will carry burdens. 

19. A person born with Saturn in sign Sagittnri or 
Pisces will die an excellent death, will be a faithful officer 
in the king’s palace, will have good sons and a good wife, 
will be wealthy, will be the chief raau in a town, in an army 
or in a village. 

A person born with Saturn in sign Capricorn or Aqu¬ 
arius will enjoy the wives and property of other men, will 
be the head of a town, a village or an army, will have weak 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA. 


171 


CH. 18.] 

eyes, will be dirty, will be indifferent to bathing, will hare 
a permanent wealth and authority and will enjoy the porperty 
acquired by him* 

Notes. 

To determine the effects of the planetary places the 
reader is referred to Stanza 13 and Note (6) to it of the last 
Chapter. 

20. The effects described for the several signs of the 
zodiac when the Moon occupies them or when they are as* 
pected by planets also apply to the rising sign; nay — more 
effects are due to the risnig sign and to the 2nd, 3rd, and 
other bhavas (houses). If the houses be powerful and if their 
lords be also powerful, these effects will come to pass 
fully. 

Notes. 

If the rising sign and its lord be powerfnl, a person 
born will be of strong physique ; if the 2nd house and its 
lord be powerful, the person will be rich. Similar remarks 
apply to the other bhavas. 

The following have been extracted from Satyachariar's 
work on Horscopy* 

1. A person born when Aries is the rising sign will 
have disfigured fingers, will be of irascible tempr, will 
bring on quarrels, will act inconsistently with his views, 
will be of bilious and windy temperament, will be a nig¬ 
gard, will suffer grief, will when young, be separated from 
his parents and from his preceptor, will have very few sons 
will assist his brothers and kinsmen, will be virtuous, will 
travel to foreign lands, will engage in useless work, will 
marry either a woman of low caste or a deceitful woman or 
a woman of defective limbs or one who was already married, 
will obtain as relations persons of a friendly nature and will 
meet his death either by weapons or by poison or by 
bilious complaints or by the people about him or by fire, 
by rain, by being shut up in a prison or by fall. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



172 


BBIHAT JA.TAK1. 


[CH. 18 


2. A person bom when Taurus is the rising sign will 
have large lips, cheek, nose and forehead, will be of phleg¬ 
matic and windy temperament, will bo liberal in gift, will be a 
spendthrift, will have daughters and very few sons, will 
ill-treat his parents, will be fond of work, will do wicked 
deeds, will earn much wealth, will ever be fond of his wife 
and will suffer from weapons. He will meet his death by 
weapons, ropes or animals, in foreign lands or will die 
through over work or by water or by a spear or through 
want of exercise or by quadrupeds. 

3. A person born when the rising sign is Gemini will 
be either of defective limbs or will possess extra limbs, will 
be of sweet speech, will engage in excellent works, will be 
of a mixed temperament, will be of small understanding 
and of small body, will be liked by his preceptor and by 
sages, will have very few younger brothers, will not be of 
very active habits, will put other men to disgrace, will 
possess good qualities, will be anxious to engage iu a 
number of works, will be virtuous and not wicked, will 
earn and spend much, will possess several wives and will be 
free from serious diseases. He will meet his death by 
snake-bite, poison, animals or by water. 

4. A person born when the rising sign is Cancer will 
be a man of no fixed prinoiples, will suffer diseases of 
genital organs, will be of a timid nature, will be grateful, 
will be of phlegmatic and windy temperament, will readily 
understand things, will follow his enemies, will spend the 
property of other men also, will be haughty among his 
people, will be pat to disgrace by his kinsmen, will lose 
his children, will engage in important works in foreign 
lands, will be of imperfect speech, will be a master over 
other men, will have an unequal wife, will suffer disgrace 
from his euemies and will be respected by many persons. 
Ho will meet his death by means of a neck ornament or a 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



Bill BAT JATAXA. 


OH. 18.] 


173 


rope, by phlegmatic complaints, by the fracture of bones, by 
sword cut, or by dropsy. 

5« A person bora when the rising sign is Leo will 
be severe, fond of animal food and of bilious temperament, 
will conceal himself, will support his family by engaging 
in various works, will be a niggard, will like the people, 
will be a man of renown and of resignation; will annoy bis 
kinsmen, will be able, and energetic, will be of a sinful 
nature, will possess several wives and will have a diseased 
waist, knees and teeth. He will meet his death by vt ea. 
pons, hurtful animals, by poison, by wood, by diseases, by 
the creatures of water or by starvation. 

6. A person born when the rising sign is Virgo, will 
be of sweet speech, of bright personal appearanoo, long 
legs and arms, will be of a mixed temperament, will be of 
excellent beauty, will receive wounds, will be rich, will be 
a niggard, will be attached to his kinsmen, will have many 
daughters, will be in bad terms with his brothers and 
sisters, will be inclined to deeds of virtue, will not* earn 
much, and will be skilled in work. He will meet his death 
by means of quadrupeds, weapons, bilious attacks, grief, 
fire or rope. 

7* A person born when Libra is the rising sign will 
be of a rough body, a harsh nature and a phlegmatic and 
windy temperament, will thoughtlessly begin a work, will 
be of short neck, will be grateful, will acquire much wealth, 
will become famous by his acts of liberality, will serve 
under his preceptor, will be respected by his father, brothers 
and others, will be fond of walking, will be virtuous, will 
conceal himself to escape troubles from his kinsmen, will 
lose his wife, will be fond of fight and will suffer from 
grief. He will meet his death by a famous roan, by his 
kinsmen, by mild quadrupeds, by perspiration, by sepa¬ 
ration from an object of desire and by the fatigne of 
journey. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



174 


BBIHAT JATAKA. 


[OH 13 

8. A person born when the rising sign is Scorpio wil 
have a broad face and a long belly, will be of a harsh 
nature and of a bilious temperament, will have brown eyes, 
will be slow and of quick pace, will be a master over others, 
will protect a large family, will be hated by his kinsmen, 
will spend much, will have many children, will not live in 
comfort, will have no enemies, will lose his virtues, will 
protect oxen, will fall into bad temper on account of his 
wife, will yield nothing to his enemies, will have his own 
men for his enemies, will suffer from numerous diseases 
and will surrender^himgelf to his foe out of fear of sword- 
cut. He will meet his death by imprisonment, blows, 
sword-cut, bad diseases or by fire. 

9. A person born when the rising sign is Sagittari 
will have large lips, teeth and nose, will be of phlegmatic 
and windy temperament, will have a fleshy genital organ, 
thighs and arms, will be of defective nails, will be skilled 
in work, will be bold in fight, will serve under men of low 
caste, will be deprived of his property by thieves, by fire 
or by the king, will be learned in laws, will be respected 
by many people, will give trouble to his brothers, will 
work in foreign lands, will be liked by the king, will bo 
indifferent to deeds of virtue, will quarrel with his wives 
and will have a diseased face. He will meet his death by 
quadrupeds, snakes, the king or by imprisonment. 

10. A person born when the rising sign is Capricorn 
will have a small nose, long face, arms and legs; will be of 
windy temperament, of a timid nature, will thoughtlessly 
engage in work, will suffer imprisonment, will have a small 
family, and small wealth, will be a niggard, will have 
daughters, will have no kinsmen, will live in plenty, will 
acquire wealth by his valor, through the king and by forest 
will observe fasting, will have a wife of low caste, and will 
be attached to her, will have a large body, few hairs and 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 19.] BBIHAT JATAKA. r 175 

weak knees and will suffer fron diseases. He will meet his 
death by children, by the wind, by weapons, by the king, by 
poison* by fall, by an elephant* by an increase of bile or by 
dyspepsia. 

11* A person born when the rising sign is Aquarius* 
will bo of inactive habits and of harsh nature, will be the 
eldest in the family, will be of bilious and windy temper¬ 
ament, will have a nose shaped like the flower of the 
sesamum plant, will waste his wealth* will have many 
servants, will be hated by his kinsmen, preceptors, enemies 
and friends, will be fond of deeds of wickedness* will acquire 
much property, will never spend money on. charity, will 
assume a show of virtue, will worship the Devas and will 
suffer from phlegmatic attacks affecting the chest. He will 
meet his death from pains in the belly by vomition and by 
drugs administered by women. 

12. A person born when the rising sign is Pisces will 
have thick lips, fish-like eye and large nose* will be of 
phlegmatic and windy temperament, will be a sage, will be 
of disfigured skins and of active habits, will be remarkable 
for his gain and loss* will have good servants and kinsmen, 
will be disposed to deeds of virtue, will have a good wife, 
will help his father* will join a woman of low deeds and will 
have bad enemies. He will meet his death by disease, 
corruption of the blood, snake*bite, attack of a lion, by the 
chiefs of parties of men, by venereal diseases, by drags, by 
fasting;or by the fatigaes of journey* 

CHAPTER XIX 

On Planetary Aspects. 

1. If at the time of birth, the Moon occupy sign Aries 
and be aspeoted by Mars* the person will become a king; if 
she be aspectel by Mercury, the person will be learned; if 

23 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



176 


BUI HAT JATAKA. 


[CH. 19. 


by Jupiter, be will resemble a king; if by Venus* he will be 
a man of good conduct; if by the Saturn, he will be a thief 
and if by the Sun, he will be poor. 

If at the time of birth, the Moon occupy sign Taurus 
and be aspected by Mars, the person will be poor; if she be 
aspeoted by Mercury, he will be a thief; if by Jupiter, he 
will be respected by the people; if by Venus he will be 
a king; if by Saturn, he will be rich and if by the Sun be 
will be a Sei vaut. 

If at the time of birth the Moon occupy sign Gemini 
and be aspeoted by Mars, the person will sell weapons; if 
she be aspected by'‘Mercury, he will become a king $ if by 
Jupiter, he will be learned ; if by Venus, he will be fearful; 
if by Saturn, he will be a weaver and if by the Sun, he 
will be poor. 

If at the time of birth, the Moon occupy sign Cancer 
and be aspeoted by Mars, the poison will be a valiant sol* 
dier ; if she be aspected by Mercury, he will be a literary 
author ; if by Jupiter, he will be learned ; if by Venus, he 
will be a king; if by Saturn, he will live by weapons and if 
by the Sun, he will suffer from diseases of the eye. 

2 % If at the time of birth, the Moon occupy sign Leo 
and be aspected by Mercury, the person will be an Astrologer; 
if aspected by Jupiter, he will be rich; if by Venus, he will 
be a king; if by Saturn, ho will be a barber ; if by the Sun, 
he will be a king and if by Mars, he will also be a king. 

If at the time of birch, the Moon occupy sign Virgo 
and be aspected by Mercury, the person will be a king ; if 
aspected by Jupiter, be will be a commander of armies ; if 
by Venus, he will be vigilent and if by Saturn, the Sun or 
Mars, ho will live by serving under women. 

If at the time of birth the Moon occupy sign Libra 
and be aspected by Mercury, the person will be a king; if 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



on. 19] 


BRIHAT JATAKA* 


177 


aspected by jupiter, he will work in gold ; if byJVenus, he 
will be a trader; and if by Saturn, the Sun or Mars, he will 
be a chief and will work mischief. 

If at the time of birth, the Moon occupyjaign Scorpio 
and be aspected by Mercury, the person will get twins; if 
aspected by Jupiter, he will be obedient ; if by Vernus, he 
will be a washerman ; if by Saturn, he will be of defective 
limbs; if by the Sun, he will be poor and if by Mars he will 
be a king. 

3. If at the time of birth, theMoon occupy sign Sagit- 
tari and be aspected by Mercury, the person will protect 
his kinsmen; if aspected by Jupiter, he will be a king; 
if by Venus, he will protect many men; and if by Saturn, 
the Sun or Mars he will be a fop, will put on a show of 
virtue and will not attend to the work of other persons. 

If at the time of birth, the Moon occupy sign Capricorn 
and be aspected by Mercury, the person will be the king of 
kings ; if aspected by Jupiter, he will bo a king ; if by 
Venus, he will be learned; if by Saturn, be will be rich; if by 
the Sun, he will be poor and if by Mars, be will be a king. 

If at the time of birth, the Moon occupy sign Aquarius 
and be aspeoted by Mercury, the person will be a king ; if 
aspected by Jupiter, he will resemble a King ; if by Venus 
or Saturn or the Sun or Mars he will bo fond of the wives 
of other men. 

If at the time of birth, the Moon occupy sign Pisces 
and be aspected by Mercury, the person will be witty; if 
aspected by Jupiter, he will be a king; if by Venus, lie 
will be learned and if by Saturn, the Sun or Mars, he will 
do wicked deeds. 

Notes. 

As stated in the last Stanza of the last chapter, all that 
has been said of the Moon applies also to the rising sign. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



178 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


[oh. 19. 

The Moon by aspecting the several sigos of the Zodiao 
except sign Ganoer produces malefic effects when such signs 
are rising signs. 

4. If at the time of birth, the Moon oocupy the solar 
or lunar hora of a sign, she will produoe benefic effects if 
She be aspeoted by planets occupying respectively the solar 
and lunar horas. (a) If the Moon be aspeoted by the lord 
of the Drekkana occupied by her or by planets occupying 
frieudly signs she will produce benfio effects, (b). The effects 
described for the Moon occupy ing the several signs and as- 
peoted by the several planets apply to her when she occu¬ 
pies the several Dwadasnmsas and is aspected by the seve¬ 
ral planets* (c.) If the Moon ocoupy particular Navamsas 
and be aspected by the several planets, the effects will be 
those stated^as follows. 

Notes. 

(a) . If the Moon be aspected by planets occupying 
horas whose lords are different from the lords of the horas 
occupied by her the effects will be malefic. The same re¬ 
marks apply to the rising hora. 

(b ) . The same remarks apply to the rising Drekkana. 

(c) . The same remark holds with reference to the 
rising Dwadasamsa. If the rising Dwadasamsa be other 
than that of Cancer, and if the rising sign be aspected by 
the Moon the effects will be malefic ; if the rising Dwada¬ 
samsa be that of Cancer, and if the rising sign be aspected 
by the Moon, the effects will be benefic. 

5. If at the time of birth the Moon occupy the 
Navamsa of Mars and be aspected by the Sun, the person will 
be the protector of a city ; if aspected by Mars, he will be 
fond of torture ; if aspected by Mercury he will be skilled 
iu duel fight; if by Jupiter, lie will be a king $ if by Ve¬ 
nus he will be rich and if by Saturn, he will bring on quar¬ 
rels. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBIHAT JATAKA. 


179 


CH. 19 # ] 

If at the time of birth jtheMoon occupy the Navamsa of 
Venus and be aspected by the Sun, the person will be a 
fool; if aspected by Mars, he will be fond of the wives of 
other men; if by Mercury or Jupiter he will be produce 
good literary works; if by Venus, he will be fond of com¬ 
forts ; if by Saturn, lie will unite with the wives of other 
men* 

6. If at the time of birth, the Moon occupy the 
Navamsa of Mercury and be aspected by the Sun, the 
person will bo a duellist or a dancer ; if aspected by Mars 
he will be a thief; if by Mercury he will be a great poet; 
if by Jupiter, he will be a minister; if by Venus, he will be 
skilled in music and if by Saturn, he will be skilled in 
mechanical arts. 

If at the time of birth, the Moou occupy the Navamsa 
of Cancer and be aspected by the Sun, the person will be 
of small body; if aspected by Mars, he will be a niggard 
and will possess small wealth ; if by Mercury he will prac¬ 
tise austerities; if by Jupiter, ho will be a chief, if by Venus, 
he will thrive by women and if by Saturn, he will be fond 
of work. 

7. If at the time of birth, the Moon occupy the Navamsa 
of Leo and be aspected by the Sun, the person will be a 
man of angry temper; if aspected by Mars, he will be liked 
by the king; if by Mercury, he will become rich by the 
discovery of hidden treasure; if by Jupiter, he will cairy 
his orders into effect; if by Venus, he will have no sons and 
if by Saturn he will do wicked deeds. 

If at the time of birth, the Moon occupy tho Navamsa 
of Jupiter and bo aspected by the Sun, the person will be 
a man of well-known powers? if aspected by Mars, he will 
bo learned in'the rules of fight; if by Mercury, he will be 
skilled inridicule; if by Jupiter, he will be a minister; if 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BEIHAT JATAKA. 


ISO 


[ch* 19. 


by Venus, lie will be a man of no virility and if by 
Saturn, he will be oharitably disposed. 

8. if at the time of birth, the Moon occupy the 
Navamsa of Saturn and be aspected by the Sun,* the person 
will have very few children ; if aspected by Mars, he will be 
unhappy though rich . if by Mercury, ho will bo haughty i if 
by Jupiter, he will do deeds unsuited to his station iu life ,* 
if by Veiius, he will be fond of bad women and if by Saturn, 
he will be a niggard (a). AH that has been said for the 
Moon occupying particular Navamsas and aspected by the 
several planets applies also to the Sun—with this exception 
that where solar aspect has been referred to, it shall be read 
as lunar aspect. 

Notes. 

(a). The same remark applies to the rising Navam- 
sa as to the Moon—but if the Moon aspect the rising 
sign when the rising Navamsa is other than that of Cancer 
the effects will be malefic. 

9. If the Moon occupy a Vargottama position, her 
own Navamsa, or other Navamsas and be aspected by 
benefio planets, the effects will respectively be full, imper¬ 
fect and small. But if she be aspected by malofio planets, 
the effects will respectively be small, imperfect and full 
(a). If the lord of the Navamsa be powerful, the effects 
described for planetary aspects in the case of signs and 
Navamsas (6) will alone come to pass (c.) 

Notes. 

(а) . The sume remark applies to the rising sign and 
to the Sun* 

(б) . Navamsas occupied by the Sun or the Moon or the 
rising Navamsa. 

(c)‘ And those described for planetary aspects in the 
oase of horas, Drekkanas and Dwadasamsas. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 20 ] 


DIM HAT J AT AKA. 


181 


CHAPTER XX. TJ 

On the Planets in the Bhavas. 

. 1. If at the time of birth of a person, the sun oc¬ 
cupy the ascendant, the person will be^fond of fight, 
slow at work, without sight and without mercy; but if 
Aries be the risiug sign and the Sun ^occupy it the person 
will be rich and afflicted with diseases of the eye; if Leo be 
the rising sign and the Sun occupy it, he will be blind at 
night ,* if Libra be the rising sign and the sun occnpy it, the 
person will be blind and poor ; if Cancer be the rising sign 
and the Sun occupy it, he will have a mote in his eye. If 
the Sun occupy the 2nd house from the ascendant, the 
person will be greatly rich, will have his wealth carried 
away by the king and will suffer from diseases in the 
face* 

2. If at the time of birth, the Sun occupy the 3rd 
house from the ascendant, the person will be intelligent and 
powerful; if he occupy the 4th house, the person will be 
afflicted with grief and meutal sufferings ; if he occupy the 
5th house, he will have no sons and will be poor and if he 
occnpy the 6fch house, the person will be powerful and be 
subjugated by his enemy (a). 

Notes. 

(a). According to another reading, if the Sun occnpy 
the 6th house from the ascendant the person’s enemies, will 
meet with ruin According to Satyachariar snoh a person will 
be free from enemies, diseases and giief j but the text has 
the support of Tavanachariar and Sqohidhwaja* 

8* If at the time of birth of a person the Sun occupy 
the 7th house from the ascendant, the person will suffer 
digrace at the hands of women ; if he occupy the 8th 
house, the person will have very few sons and will become 
bliud ; if he occupy the 9th house, the person will have sons 


Digitized by AjOOQle 



182 BBIHAT JATAKA. [CH. 20. 

wealth and comfort (a), ; if he occupy the 10th house, the 
person will live in comfort and will be powerful; if he oocu- 
py the 11th house the person will be very rich and ifhe 
oocupy the 12th house he will become an apostate* 

Notes. 

(a). According to another reading a person born with 
the Sun in the 9th house will have neither sons nor wealth. 
Accordingly Satyachariar says that such a person will do 
wicked deeds, will be afflicted with diseases and will attain 
an humble position in life, 

4. If at the time of birth of a person the Moon occu¬ 
py the ascendant such person will become dumb or mad or 
an idiot or blind or deaf ; he will do mean deeds or will 
become a slave ; if the rising sign occupied by the Moon be 
Cancer, Aries or Taurus the person will be rich, will have 
many sons and will be wealthy respectively. If the Moon 
occuppy the 2nd house from the ascendant, the person will be 
a man of a large family. If she occupy the ttrd house, he 
will delight in torturing animals* If she oocupy the 4th 
or the 5th house, he will be in the full enjoyment of what 
the houses signify (a). If she occupy the Oth house, the 
person from will be of soft body, will have a dull appetite 
will be sparing in sexual union, will bo cruel and will be 
slow at work. 

Notes. 

(a). That is, if the Moon oocupy the 4th house from the 
ascendant, the person will be happy,will have kinsmen and 
houses, and will be learned; and if sho occupy the 5th house, 
the person will possess intelligence, sons and the like. 

(5.) If at the time of birth the Moon ocoupy the 7th 
house from the ascendant, the person will be jealous of the 
prosperity of other men and will be lustful. If she oocupy 
the 8th house, the person will be fiickleminded and will be 
afflicted with diseases. If she ocoupy the 9th house the 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



< bn. 20.1 BBIHAT JMkK.il CBS 

* • 

person will be liked by all and will have sons, kinsmen and 
wealth. If she occupy the 10th house, he will be successful 
in all places, will be virtuous, wealthy, intelligent aud 
valorous. If she occupy the 11th house, the person will be 
famous and will gain wealth and the like and if she occupy 
the 12th house from the asceudaut, the persou will be 

wicked and of defective limbs. 

6. If at~tbe time of birth of a person Mars occupy the 
ascendant, such person will possess a wounded body ; if he 
occupy the 2nd house, the person will eat low meals ; if he 
occupy the 9th house, the person will be a sinner tmd if he 
occupy the remaining houses (a) he will produce the some 
effects as tho Suu in those places. 

Again, if at tho time of birth of a person Mercury occu¬ 
py the ascendant such person will be learned. If ho occupy 
the 2nd house, the person will be wealthy. If he occupy 
the 3rd house the person will be wicked. If he occupy the 
4th house, the person will be learned.^ If lie occupy the 5th 
house, he will be a minister under a king ; if he occupy the 
6th house, lie will have no enemies. If he occupy the 7th 
house, he will possess a knowledge of law. If he occupy 
the 8th house, the person will be renowned for his virtues. 
If he occupy the 9th, 10th, 11th and 12th houses lie will pro* 
duce the same effects as the Sun in those places. 

Notes* 

(a). That is the 3rd 4tli, 5th, 6th, 7tb, 8th, 10th # 
11th, and 12tli houses. 

7. If at the time of birth of a person Jupiter occupy 
the 12 signs from the ascendant, such person will respeo" 
lively be learned, of good nspeech, a niggard, will live in 
comfort, will be i^lSlfigent, will have no ^ueinies, will 
possess qualities superior to those of his father, will do deeds 

24 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



ir 




JBBinAT JATAKA. 


9 £ 


[ch. 2Oi 


uosuited to bis rank in life, will^)e a devotee, will be pos¬ 
sessed^!* wealth, will be full gain aud will d<^fearful 
deeds. 


8. If at the time of birth of a person Venus occupy 
the ascendant, such person will be skilled in aots of love 
and will live in great comfort; if Venus occupy the 7th 
house, the person will be fond of quarrels and of sexual 
union; if Venus occupy the 5th house the person will live 
in comfort and if he occupy the remuiniug houses (a) the 
effects will be the same as those of Jupiter in those plaoes ; 
but if Venus occupy sigu Pisces at the time of birth the 
person will become rich. 

Notes. 

(a). That is the 2nd, 3rd, 4th, 6ih, 8th, 9th, 10th, 
11th and 12th houses, 

9. If at the time of birth of a person Saturn occupy the 
ascendant, such person will be poor, will be afflicted with 
diseases and sexual passion, will be dirty will suffer muoh 
from diseases while young,aud will be of indinstinct speech. 
But if the ascendant, occupied by Saturn, be Libra, Sagittari, 
Capricorn, Aquarius or Pisces, the person, will be as happy 
as a king, will rule over a village or a town, will be learned 
and will possess fine limbs. But it Saturn occupy any of the 
other houses (from the 2nd to the 12th) the effects will be 
the same as those of the Suu in the same places. 

10. In determining the effects of the planets in the 
several houses from the ascendant the nature of such houses 
shall bo taken into nocount, that is, whether the houses 
occupied by the several planets are their friendly signs or 
inimical or neutral signs or their own houses or their exal¬ 
tation signs and the like (a). Again, according to Satya- 
churiar, beneflc planets promote the bhavas while malefio 
oues reduoe them; but in the oases of the 6th, 8th and 12th 
houses the reverso is the case (6) 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH> 20*] 


hRtHAT JATAKA« 


185 


Notes* 

(a). That is if the houses occupied by the planets he 
their exaltation signs, their friendly signs* or theit own 
houses the effects described wilt fully come to pass; if such 
houses be their inimical signs the effects will fail and if the 
houses be neutral signs* neither more nor less of the effects 
described will come to pass. All this is according to Garga* 

(V). According to Sat.yachariar, if a benefic planet 
occupy the 6th house the enemies will meet with ruin and 
if a malefic planet occupy it> the enemies will increase* 
Again, if a benefic planot occupy the 8th house, a person 
will be freed from dangehs to life aud if a malefic planet 
occupy it, danger to life will increase. Lastly if a beuefio 
planot occupy the I2th house there will be no loss to the 
person and if a malefic planet occupy it there will bo an 
increase of loss. 

11. If the planets to which good effects have been 
assigned occupy their exaltation signs such effects will fully 
come to pass. If they occupy their Moolatrikona sigufl 
only three-fourths of such effects will come to pass ; if they 
occupy their own houses one-half of such effects will como 
to pass; if they occupy fclieir friendly signs one-qnartcr 0£ 
such effects will come to pass; if they occupy their inimical 
signs less than ono-quartor of such effects will come to pass 
and if the planets occupy their depression signs or if they 
happen to be Asbangaba planets the good effects described 
will wholly fail. 

Notes. 

If the effects be bad, then if the planets occupy their 
depression signs or if they be Astangata planets, the evil 
effects will fully come to pass. If they occupy their inimi¬ 
cal signs, then three-fourths, if they occupy their friendly 
signs, then one-half, if they occupy their own signs then one- 
quarter, if they occupy their Moola Ti ikona signs, then less 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



186 


BUI HAT JATAKA. 


[oa. 1 


than a quarter of the evil effects will come to pass. But if 
they occupy their exaltation signs., the evil effect will fail 


CHAPTER XXL 

Oh the Phnets in tite Several Vargas. 

1. If a single planet occupy its own house »fc the time 
of birth of a person such person will possess the average 
dignity ot the members of his family ; if two planets occupy 
their own houses the’person will he an important member of 
his family; if three planets occupy their owu houses, the person 
will be respected by bis kinsmen; if four planets occupy 
their own houses, the person will be noli; if five planets d 0 
so lie will live in comfort; if six, he will livo in luxurious 
ease and as happy as a king and if seven planets occupy 
their own houses the person will become a king. 

Again if one of the planets occupy a friendly sign, the 
person will lead a dependent life ; if two planets do so lie 
will bo protected by his friends; if three, by his kinsmen ; 
if four, by his brothers^iind cousins > if live, the person will 
be a master over many people ; if six, he will become a coin- 
inauder of an army mid if seven, ho will become a king. 

2. If at the time of birth of a person, a single planet 
occupy its exaltation sign and be aspected by a friendly 
planet suoh person will become a king; if at the time of 
birth one of the planets occupy its exaltation sign and be 
accompanied by a friendly planet, the person will become 
very rich and will be uuiveoally respected ; if at the time 
of birth one of the planets cooupy either an. inimical ora 
depression sign, the person will beooine poor; if two planets 
oocupy their inimical or depression sigus, the person will 
become afflicted with grief. If three planets occupy their 
inimical or depression sigus, the person will become a fool* 
If lour pianola do ao, the person will become afflicted with 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




OB. 21.] BRIHAT JATAKA,, 167 

diseases. If five pl&nets^do so the* person will goffer* im¬ 
prisonment; if six planets^the person will be a victim to 
much grief and if seven planets do so, he will subject to 
torture persons who ought not to be tortured. 

Notea 

Mercury and the Sun cannot at the same time occupy 
their depression signs—via .Pisces and Libra respective- 
> ly- Seven planets cannot therefore occupy their depression * 
signs at the same time. In this as in certain other oases 
K-^feady stated, the author has simply quoted the views of for¬ 
mer writers. \ 

3. According to Satyaohariar a person born when 
Aquarius is the rising sign will not be happy ; but accord- 
ing to Tavaoas, a person born when Aquarius is the rising 
Duadasamsa will not be happy. This latter view is objec¬ 
ted to by Yishnugupta on the ground that eaoh sign of the 
Zodiac contains the Dwadasamsa of Aquarius and that bene* 
ficial effects have been ascribed to several signs. 

4* A person, born when malefic planets occupy the 
solar horas of odd signs will be of widespread fame, will do 
important deeds, will be powerful, healthy and of bright 
appearance. A person born when benefic planets occupy 
the lunar horas of even signs will be of gentle manners 
and of bright appearance ; will live in comfort, will be liked 
by all ,* will be intelligent and will be of sweet speeoh. ’ 

5. If the horas occupied by the malefic and benefic 
planets be the same as stated above while the signs are dif" 
erent, (a) the person will be all that has been stated above 
for the two yogas in a moderate degree ; but if both the 
horas and signs be different (b) the effects will fail* 

Notes. 

(u).^That is if the malefio planets occupy the~so1ar 
horas in ^ven signs or the benefiio planets occupy the lunar 
horas in odd signs* 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



188 


BftltUT JATAKA. 


CH. 21.] 

* (h) That is if the malefic planets occupy the lunar 
Koras of the even signs or the benefio planets occupy the 
solar horas of odd 8 gns. 

N. B. Doth the author and commentator have failed 
to notice the ctse of a person born when the malefic 
planets occupy the lunar horas of odd signs or the benefio 
planets occupy the solar horas of even signs* Evidently a 
person born under these yogas wll be all that has been stated 
in the 4th stanza in a moderate degree. . 

6. A person born when the Moon ocoupies either her 
own Drekkaua or a friendly (a) Drekkana will be of very 
fine beauty and of well-known virtues j but if the Moon 
occupy other Drekkauas the person will be what has been 
stated above agreeably to the character of the lord of suoh* 
Drekkana^)* . *u./ «; 

If at the time of birth the Moon occupy a Sarpa 
(serpent) Drekkana (c) the person will be wicked ; if she 
occuny an Ayudha (weapon) Drekkana (d) the person will do 
deeds ot torture j if she occupy a Chatushpad (quadruped) 
Drekkana (e) the person will cohabit with his preceptor’s 
wife, and if she occupy a Pakshi (bird) Drekkna (/) the 
persoii will be of wandering habits. . 

Notes. 

(a) . Friendly at the time of birth. Vide chapter. II 
stanza 13* 

(b) . That is if suoh lord he netural (at the time of 
birth) to the Moon, the person will be what has been stated 
in a moderate degree; but if he be iuimioal to the Moon, the 
effects will fail. 

(c) . Sarpa Vyala Drekkauas : These are the 2nd Drek 
k ana of Cancer, the 1st of Vrischika and the 3rd of Pisces 

(d) . Ayudha Drekkauas : These are the 1st and 3rd 
Drekkanns.of Aries, the 2nd of Gemini, the 1st of Leo, th<> 
2ud of Libra aud tho 1st of Aquarius 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



B BIHAT JATAKA< 


189 


<jh. 21.] 

( 0 ). Obatushpad Drekkanas : These are the 2nd Drek- 
kana of Aries,the 2nd and 3rd of Taurus, the 1st of Cancer, 
the 3rd of Libra, the 3rd of Scorpio and the 1st of 
Sagittari- 

( f ). Fakshi Drekkanas : These are 2nd Drekknna of 
Aries, the 2nd of Gerniui, the 1st of Leo and the 2nd of 
Libra. 

If the Drekkanas occnpied by the Moon be of more than 
one character, the person will be all that has beeu stated for 
each character. 

7. A person born when the rising Navamsa (a) is that 
of Aries will be a thief ; when it is that of Taurus, he will 
enjoy away his earnings ;when it is that of Gemini, the per¬ 
son will bo learned ; when it is that of Cancer he will be 
wealthy ; when it is that of Leo, he will bo a king ; when it is 
that of Virgo, he will be hermaphrodite ; when it is that of 
Libra, he will be bold in fight; when it is that of Scorpi Q 
he will earn his livelihood by carrying loads; when 
it is that of Sagitari he will become a slave ; when it is that 
of Capricorn ho will be a sinner ; when it is that of Aqu¬ 
arius, he will be wioked and when it is that of Pisces he 
be fearless. 

But if the rising Navamsa be at the same time a 
Vargottma Navamsa (b) the person born will be the chief 
of the respective classes of persons mentioned ( 0 ). 

The rising Dwadasamsas produce the same effects as 
the rising signs. 

Notes. 

(a) * These Navamsns of Aries, Tanrus, Gemini &c., 
are Navamsas other than those of the respective signs Aries, 
Taurus, Gemini &c. 

(b) . That is Navamsas excluded in note (a). 

(c) . For instance, the person will be a chief of 
thieves &o. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



190 


1BIHJLT JATAXA^ 


[oh. 2l« 

8. A person born when Mars occupies his own Trim 
samsA will be a married man* jrill be powerful, will wear 
ornaments, will be generous, will be of bright appearauoa 
and will thoughtlessly engage in work. 

A person born when Saturn occupies his own Trimsamsa 
will be afflicted with diseases ; his wife will die before him, he 
will be wicked, will covet the wives of other men, will be 
afflicted with grief, will have a house, clothes, attendants 
and the like and will be dirty. 

9. A person born when Jupiter oconpies his own 
Trimsamsa will be rich, famous, happy, intelligent, of bright 
appearance, universally respected, free from diseases, of 
active habits and will live in luxury. 

A person born when Mercury occupies his own Trim- 
samsa will be intelligent and learned in the fine aits; will be 
a fop, a literary author, of distinct speech, will be skilled in 
carpentry and the Nike, will follow the rules of life laid 
down by sages, will commence bold projects and will be 
mnch respected. 

10. A person born when Venus occupies his own Trim¬ 
samsa will have many sons, will live in comfort,will be free 
from diseases, will love mankind, will be rich, beautiful, wick¬ 
ed, of fair body and will enjoy many women. 

A person born when the Trimsamsa of Mars is occu¬ 
pied by the Sun, will be bold iu fight and when it is occu¬ 
pied by the Moon he will be slow at work. 

A person bom when the Trimsamsa of Saturn is occu¬ 
pied by the Sun will be wicked and when it is occupied by 
the Moon, he will indulge in acts of torture* 

A person born when the Trimsamsa of Jopiter is occu¬ 
pied by the Sun will he of good disposition and when it is 
occupied by the Moon, the person will be< o no rich 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



ch. 22.] 


BB1HAT JATAKA. 


191 


A person bom when the Trimsarnsa of Mercury is occu¬ 
pied by the Sun will live in .coinfort aud when it is occu- 
, pied by the Moon the person will be learned. 

A person bom wheu the Trimsarnsa of Venus is occu¬ 
pied by the Sun, will possess a fine body and when it is 
occupied by the Moon he will be liked by the people. 

CHAPTER XXII. 

Oh Miscbllanbous Yogas. 

1. Planets occupying their own sigus or their exal. 
tation or Moolatrikoua signs are said to be Karaka planets 
to one another, if, at the same time they occupy the Ken¬ 
dras from the ascendant. In the above case a planet occu¬ 
pying the 10th house from another plauet is said to be the 
special Karaka of that planet. 

Notes. 

In this and in the next two stanzas the term “ Karaka 
(helping) planets ” is defined. 

2. Accordingly, if the rising Bign be Cancer and the 
Moon occupy it and if Mars, Saturn, the Sun and Jupiter 
occupy their exaltation signs, these four planets are known 
as Karaka planets to one-auother (a). Again, to a plauet 
oconpyittg the rising sign all planets (6) occupying the 10th 
or the 4th house are Karaka planets (e). 

Notes . 

(a). In other words Jupiter occupies sign Cancer 
which is at the same time the rising sign, Saturn occupies 
the 4th house Libra, Mars the 7th house Capricorn and the 
Sun the 10th house Aries. The commentator infers from 
this stanza that planets occupying their Swakshetro, Ucba 
and Mulatijkoua signs are also mutually Karaka planets, 
if they occupy Kendra signs from one another though not 
tho Kendra signs from the ascendant. * 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



192 


BKIHAT JlTAKA. 


[oh. 22. 

(£)• All the planets whether they occopy their own 
signs,! their exaltation signs or their Mulatrikona signs 
or not, according to the commentator. 

(c). That is the reverse does not hold. In other words 
the planet occupying the ascendant is not a Karaka plane t 
of those occupying the 4th or the 10th house. 

3. A planet occupying its Mulatrikona and exaltation 
sign (a) is also sftid to be a Karaka planet to one that occupies 
the LOtli house (6) from such sign, and to the latter his 
Atimitra planet is also said to be a Karaka planet. 

Kotos. 

(a). But not occupying the Kendra houses from the 
ascendaut. 

(1). This latter planet must be in his Swakshetra, 
Mulatrikona or exaltation house. The effects of the Karaka 
planets are described in Varaha Mihira’a work on Yoga Yatra 
in which it is stated that when a prince loses his kingdom, 
he recovers it in the Antardasa period of a Karaka planet; 
again it is.said that a man enjoys comfort, wealth and success 
when the Moon passes through the house of a Karaka planet, 
or through the 2nd house from that occupied by the Sun. 
Also, that the journey may be a successful one it shall be 
commenced when the Moon occupies either of the two places 
mentioned above—otherwise the traveller will receive blows 
on bis way. 

4. A person born when the rising Navamsa is a 
Vargottama one or when the Moon occupies a Vargottuma 
position will be happy and prosperous. The same remark 
applies to a person at the time of whose birth thd 2nd house 
from the Sun may be occupied by beuefic planets or the 
Kendra houses may happen to be occupied by planets at all 
(a). Also, a person at the time of whose birth there are 
Karaka planets oocupying the signs of the Zodiac will he 
happy aud prosperous. • 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



c m. 28.] 


BRIHAT JA.TAKA* 


103 


Notes. 

(a). If one of the Kendras be occupied the person will 
be happy ; if two or more be occupied be wifi be happier 
Still and if the planets be benefio the persou will be exceed¬ 
ingly happy and prosperous. 

5* If at the time of birth of a person Jupiter, the 
lord of the sigu occupied by the Moon, or the lord of the 
ascendant occupy a Kendra house, such person will be hap¬ 
py when in his manhood. Again, if at the time of com¬ 
mencement of a dasa period the lord of such period happeu 
to occupy a Prishtodaya sign, he will produce hia effects 
at the end of the period. If such lord occupy a Sirodaya 
sign he will produce his effects at the commencement of 
the period and if he occupy a Sira-Prisb today a sign, the 
effects will be felt in the middle of the period. 

Notes. 

The Dasa period is to be divided into three equal partd 
and the Sirodaya, Prishtodaya and Sirap rish today a signs 
are defined in stanza 10 of Chapter I. 

C. The Sun and Mars produce their effects immedi- • 
ately after entering a sign Jupiter and Venus when pass¬ 
ing through the middle of a sign ; Saturn and the Moon 
before quitting a sign and Meroury throughout his course. 

Notes. 

The sign mast be supposed to be divided into three 
equal parts of 10 degrees each. 

CHAPTER XXIII. 

On Malefic Togas. 

1. If at the time of birth of a person the 5th and 7th 
houses from the ascendant or from the Moon be either 
occupied or aspected by benefic planets or by their lords. 
Such person will have respectively sons (a) and a wife-— 
otherwise, (6) he wilt not have either the one or the other. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



104 


BH1HAT JATAKA. 


[CB. 23. 

If Virgo be the rising sign and if the Sun occupy it, the 
person will lose his wife provided Saturn occupies sign 
Pieces at the same time and will lose his sons if Mars 
occupy sign Capricorn at the same time.' 

Notes. 

(a.) One of 12 sorts of sons (l) Ourasa, (2) Kshetraja, (S) 
Datta, (4) Rrittrima (5) Gudhotpanna, (6) Apavidha, (7) 
Kaneenn, (8) Sahodha, (9) Kreetn, (10) Pounarbhava, (11) 
Swayamdntta and (12) Adharnaprabhava. 

(b.) That 1 b if the 5th and 7th houses from the ascendant 
or the Moon be not ooonpied or aspected bj benefio planets or by 
the lords of the houses. 

If the Moon and Saturn occupy the 7th bouse a person’s 
wife will quit him and marry another.* 

If the 7th house be aspected by the Moon and Saturn the 
number of wives of a person will be the number represented by 
the Navarasa occupied byfthe lord of the 7th house counting 
from the Navamsa of Aries. 

If Jupiter or the Moon and Venus occupy the 7th house 
and the Navamsa of the Sun or Mars, the person will have a 
single wife; but if the 7th house be aspected by the Moon and 
Venus, the person will have several wives. 

2. If, at the time of birth of a person, malefic planets 
occupy the 4th and 8th houses from Venus or if malefic 
planets be on both sides of Venus or if Venus be not ac¬ 
companied or aspected by benefio planets the person’s wife 
will die by fire, by fall or by ropes respectively*. 

Notes. 

Provided, in the Brat Toga, Venus at the same time occupies 
an Agni (fiery) Drekkana, in the second a Nipata (falling) l)rek- 
kana and in the third a Pasa (rope) Drekkana. (Vide Chapter 
27 on the Drekkanas.) 

3. If, at the time of birth of a person, one of the two 
houses, the 12th and the tfth, from the ascendant be occu- 


Digitized by 


Google 



CH. 23.1 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


195 


pied by the Sun end the other by the Moon, the person 
and bis wife will each have a sioglo eye. Again, if Venus 
and the Sun (a) occupy one of the three houses the 7th, the 
9th and the 5th from the ascendant, the person^will be of 
defective limbs, * 

jvJIptes. 

( 4 .) Venus or the Moon according to some. This is 
opposed to Garga whom the commentator qnotes. 

4. If, at the time of birth of a person, Saturn occupy 
tlie rising sign (a) and if Venus occupy the Chakra-sandhi 
Navamsas and the 7th house, the person’s wife will be 
barren (6), provided the 5th house is not occupied by benefic 
planets. Again, if the malefic planets occupy the 12th and 
the 7th houses and the ascendant and the waning Moon 
occupy the 5th house, tlio person will have neither wife 
nor sons. 

Notes* 

(a.) It is clear that the rifling sign must be Taurus or 
Virgo or Capricorn in which case the 7th houses will respectively 
be Scorpio,* Pisces and Cancer and the lash Navamsas of these 
three houses are knowu as Oh&krasandhies or Rikshassndhies 
(Vide stanza 7 Ch. I.) 

(5.) If the persou will marry again, he mny get sous ac¬ 
cording to some. 

5. If, at the time of birth of a person, Venus occupy 
the 7th house from the ascendant and be in the varga 
(division) of Saturn or Mars and be aspected by Saturn or 
Mars, the person will commit adultery. Again, if when 
Venus occupies the rarga of Saturn or Mars and is aspected 
by Saturn or Mars, the Moon, Saturn and Mars occupy the 
7th house from the ascendant, both the mau and his wife 
will commit adultery. 4 gain, if when Venus and the 
Moon ocoupy a sign, Satnru and Mars occupy the 7th 
house from the ascendant, the person will have neither wife 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



19a 


BEl HAT JATAKA. 


[oh. 28- 


nor sons. Again;, if, when male aud female planets occupy 
a sign, Saturn and Mars occupy ilia 7th house from the 
ascendant and be aspected by bene do planets, the person's 
wife will be of advanced age and the man will marry late 
in life. 

6. If at the time of birth of a person the Moon occupy 
the 10th house, Venus the7 th house and the malefic planets 
the 4t.h house, such a person will destroy his family, (a) If> 
at the time of birth, Saturn occupy a Kendra house and 
aspect a sign the Drekkana of whose lord may be occupied 
by Mercury, the person will become a painter. If, at the 
time of birth, Venus oojupy the 1 2th house from the ascen¬ 
dant and the Navamsa of Saturn, the person will be the 
son of a serving woman ,* and if at the' time of birth tho 
Sun and the Moon occupy the 7th house aud be aspected 
by Saturn, the person will do dtedi uusuibed to his rank iu 
life. 

Notes. 

(a.) The family will become extinct with him. 

7. If, at the time of birth of a person, Venus and 
Mars occupy tho 7th house from tho asoemlant and bo 
aspected by malefic planets such person will be afflicted with 
swelling illness (a). If, at the time of birth of a person, 
the Moon occupy the Navamsa of Cancer or Scorpio and be 
accompanied by malefic planets the person will be afflicted 
with diseases of the genital organ. If, at the time of birth, 
the Moon occupy the ascendant, Saturn and Mars oooupy 
the l-'tli and 2nd houses and the Sun the 7th house, the 
person will be afflicted with white leprosy. If, at the time 
of bh th of a person, the Moon occupy the 10th house from 
the ascendant, Mars the 7th house and Saturn the 2ud 
house from the Sun, such person will be of defective limbs* 

Notes. 

(a.) Suoh as elephantiasis aud the like. * 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



ce. 23.] 


BRfHAT JATAKA. 


197 


8. If, at the time of birth of a person, the Moon 
occupy a place between Saturn and Mars and the Sun 
occupy sign Capricorn, suoh person will be afflicted with 
asthma, consumption, and the diseases of the spleen ; and 
if at the time of birth, the Sun occnpy the sign or, the 
Navamsa of the Moon, the perron will be afflicted with 
plnmonary consumption, and if the Sun and the Moon 
occupy together either Cancer or Leo, the person will be 
reduced to a skeleton. 

9. If, at the time of birth of a person, the Moon 
occnpy the 5th Navamsa of Sagittari (a) or the Navamsa 
of Pisces, Cancer, Capricorn, or Aries ;&), and be either 
accompanied or inspected by Saturn and Mars, suoh person 
will be afflicted with leprosy >c). Again, if the 5th or the 
9th house from the ascendant bo sign Scorpio, Cancer, 
Taurus, or Capricorn and be either occupied o- aspeoted by 
Saturn and Mars, tho person will also be afflicted with 
leprosy. 

Notes* 

(a.) That is the Navnmsa of Leo in sign Sagittari. 

(6.) These may be Navarosaa of nny sign. 

(c.) According to YavaiiBcharya, if the Moon be nspec*ed 
by benefit! planets also at the siuno time, the person will be of 
disfignted body resulting from scratching. 

10. If, at the time of birth of a person, the Sun, the 
Moon, Mars and Saturn occupy the 8th, 6th, 2nd and 12th 
houses in any way, such person will become blind by causes 
pertaining to the most powerful of the four placets (a). 

Notes. 

(a.) If the powerful planet be the Moon, blindness will be 
caused by phlegmatic affections. If such planet he Mars, it will 
be caused by bilious affections ; if it be the Sun, then ,^>y heat or 
wood ; and it it be Saturn, it will .be caused by wiudy affections, 
by stones and like. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



198 


BK1H1T JATAEA* 


[Oil. 23. 


11. If, nt the time of birth of a person, the malefio 
planets (a) occupy the 9feh, J 1th, 3rd and 5th houses and 
be not aspected by benefic planets, such person will become 
deaf by causes pertaining to the most powerful planet > if 
such malefic planets (b) occupy the 7th house from the 
ascendant, the person will be of deformed teeth. 

Notes. 

(a.) The Sau, I he Moon, Mars and Sutarn. 

(6.) That is, wMe eee ep yiug tW 9th>* 144b, SwLaad 5th 
Ileuses and not uspected by beuefio plauets. 

12. If, ut the time of birth of a persou the eclipsed 
Moon, occupy the rising sign and if Saturn and Mars 
occupy the 5th and 9th houses from the ascendant such 
person will be subject to the influence of ghosts. Again, 
if, at the time of birth, the eclipsed Sun occupy the rising 
sign and if Saturn and Mars occupy the 5th aud 9 th 
houses from the ascendant, the person will lose his eyes. 

13. If, at the time of birth of a person, Saturn occupy 
the 7th house and Jupiter the ascendant, such person will be 
afflicted with windy complaints ; if, at the time of birth; 
Mars occupy the 7th house and Jupiter the ascendant, the 
person will become insane. If, at the time of birtb, Saturn 
occupy the ascendant and Mars occupy the 5th, 7th or 9th 
house, the person will become an idiot. Also, if, at the 
time of birtb, the waning Moon and Saturn occupy the 12th 
house, the person will also become au idiot. 

14. If, at the time of birth of a person, one of the 
four planets—the lord of the Navamsa occupied by the 
Moon, the Sun, the Moon, and Jupiter—occupy the Navamsa 
of the lord of his depression sign or an inimical Navamsa, 
such person will serve utidcr other men for his livelihood ; 
if two of the four planets occupy either the one Navamsa 
or the other, he will become a slave ; and if three of the 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATA&A. 


€H» 23.] 


199 


planets or all the four occupy the one Navamsa or the 
other, the person will be the son of a slave. 

15. If, at the time of birth of a person, the rising 
sign be Taurus, Aries or Sagibtari awl if malefic planets 
aspect it, snch person will have ugly teeth ; if, at the time 
of birth, one of the malefic signs (a) or sign Sagittari or 
Bign Taurus be the rising sign and if such sign be aspected 
by malefic planets, the person will be bald-headed ; if the 
Sun occupy the 9th or the 5th house from the ascendant and if 
lie be Aspected by malefic planets the person will bb of 
weak sight; if, at the time of birth, Saturn occupy the 5th 
or the 9th house and be aspected by malefic planets, the per- 
sonwill bo afflicted with various diseases ; and if at the time 
of birth, Mars occupy the 5tli or the 9th house and be aspect¬ 
ed by malefic planets, the person will be of defective limbs. 

Notes. 

(a.) These are the signs of Aries, Leo, Scorpio, Capricorn 
and Aquarius* 

16* If, at the time of birth of a person, the malefio 
planets occupy the 12th, 5th 2nd, and 9th houses in any 
way, such person will suffer imprisonment and restraint of 
the nature of the rising sign (a). Again, if, at the time of 
birth, the rising Drekkana be either a Sarpa (b) (snake) 
Drekkana or a Pasa (c) (rope) Drekkana and if the sign ( d ) 
of its lord be aspected by malefic planets the person will 
also suffer imprisonment of the nature of such sign. 

* Notes. 

(a.) If the rising sign be Arie9, Taurus or Sagittari, the 
person will be bound with ropes. If the lining sign be Gemini, 
Virgo, Libra or Aquarius, he will be loaded with fetters. If the 
rising sign be Ganoer, Caprioorn or Piscfes the person will be 
shut up in a fortress but will be taken care of. If the risiog 

sign be Scorpio, the person will be kept in a subterranean cellar. 

B 


A 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



200 


CEIHAT J AT AKA, 


[cH. 24- 


(6.) The Sarpa Drekkanns : These are the first Drekkana 
of Cancer, the 1st and 2nd of Soropio, and the 3rd of Pisces. 

(c ) The Pasa Drokkaua : This is the 1st Drekkana of 
Capricorn. 

(d.) That is, if the rising Drekkana be the first Drekkana 
of Caucer for instance, the lord of such Drekkana is the Moon 
whose sign agaiu is Cancer. If the rising Drekkana be the 2nd 
Drekkana of Cancer, its lord is Mars whose sign is Scorpio and 
if it be the 3rd Drekkana of Cancer, the lord of snob Drekkana 
is Jupiter whose sign is Pisces. 

17. If, at the time of birtli of a person, the Moon be 
accompanied by Saturn, aspected by Mars and be surround¬ 
ed by a halo, such person will be a man of harsh speech, 
will be afflicted with epilepsy and with consumption (a). 

If, at the time of birth, the Sun, Saturn and Mars 
occupy the 10th house from the ascendant and if they be 
not aspected by benefio planets, the person will be a servant 
of varying rauk—dignified, of moderate rank and of a low 
rank (fc). 

Notes. 

(a.) If the Moon be snbjeot to the first of the three malefio 
Yogas, the porsou will be a inau of harsh speech j if she be sub¬ 
ject to the 2nd Yogs, the person will be afflicted with epilepsy ; 
and if to the 3rd Yoga, the person will be afflicted with consump¬ 
tion. 

(b.) If one of the three planets occupy the 10th house the 
person will be a dignified servant. If two planets occupy the 
10th house ho will be a servant of middle rank and if three 
occupy the 10th house he will be a servant of low rauk. 


CHAPTER XXIV. 

On the Hoboscopy of Women. 

1. 1 The same remarks apply to the horsoopy of women 
as,to tbo horosoepy of men j but the effects which ore suitable 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



ch. 24*3 


BRIHAT J AT AC A. ' 


201 


will alone affect women and the rest will affect tlieir hus¬ 
bands. According to some ail the effects (a) will affect tho 
husband. The death of the husband shall be determined 
from the 8th house (from the ascendant) in the horoscope 
of a woman. Matters connected with the physique of a 
woman shall be determined from the rising sign and tho 
sign occupied by tho Moon and matters connected with her 
fortune and her husbaud shall be determined from the 7th 
house. 

Notes. 

(a.) EQVots which can be enjoyed by both will affect both. 
Sach effects as high appointments in the stare will affect the 
husband and matters connected with tho body will affect tho 
woman only. He:»oe the advisability of a man marrying a girl 
born under excellent planetary Yogas. 

2. If the rising sign end the sign occupied by the 
Moon be even signs the woman will be of a true femiuine 
character and if such signs be aspected by benefio planets 
she will be virtuous and modest and will wear ornaments, 
(a). Butifsuoh signs be odd the woman will possess a 
masculine shape and will be of masculine character; ahd if 
they be either occupied or aspected by malefic plauets she 
will be wicked and possess few virtues (6). 

Notes. 

(а) . According to some, virtues will bo tier ornaments. 

(б) . If either the rising sign or tho sign occupied by tie 
Moon be odd or even while the other sign is oven or odd, the 
woman will partake of the character of a malo and a female. 

A Similar remark applies when one of the Hgtts is occupied or 
aspected by a malefic or a benefio planet aud the other by a 
benefio or a malefic planet. 

3. When the rising sign or the sign occupied by the 
Moon at tho time of birth of a woman is either Aries or 
Scorpio, if tho lisiug Trimsamsa or the Tiiinsatnsiv ocoa- 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



202 


BBITTAT JATAKA* 


[cb. 24 

pied by the Moon be that of Mars, she will become un¬ 
chaste before marriage ; if it be that of Saturn, she will 
lead a life of servitude. If it be that of Jupiter, she will be 
chaste; if it be that of Mercury she will be deoeitful and 
if it be that of Venus, she will be of bad conduct. 

' 4. When the rising sign or the sign occupied by the 
Moon at the time of birth of a woman is either Taurus or 
Libra, if the rising Triinsamsa or the Trimsamsa occupied 
by the Moon be that of Mars, she will be of bad conduct; 
if it be that of Saturn, she will Marry a second time; if it 
be that of Jupiter she will possess good qualities; if it be 
that of Mercury, she will be skilled in music and dance 
and if it be that ofVenus, she will possess all good quali¬ 
ties and will be of wide-spread fame. Again, when the 
rising sign or the sign occupied by the Moon at the time of 
birth of a woman is either Gemini or Virgo, if the rising 
Trims&msa or the Trimsamsa occupied by the Moon be that 
of Mars she will be deceitful; if it be that of Saturn sh a 
will partake of the nature of a hermaphrodite ; if it be that 
of Jupiter she will be chaste ; if it be that of Mercury she 
will possess many good qualities and if it be that of Venus, 
she will, out of lust,,commit adultery. 

5. When the rising sign or the sign occupied by the 
Moon at the time of birth of a woman is Cancer, if the rising 
Trimsamsa or the Trims&msa occupied by the Moon be that 
of Mars she will be of an independent nature; if it be that 
of Saturn she will murder her husbaud; if if be that of 
Jupiter, she will possess many good qualities; if it be that 
of Mercury she will be skilled in works of art and if it bo 
that of Venus she will be of bad conduot. 

Wheu the rising sign or the sign occupied by the Moon 
at the time of birth of a woman is Leo, if the rising Trims- 
■ amsa or the Triinsamsa occupied by the Moon be that of 
Mars, she will be of a masculine nature. If it be that of 


Digitized by 


Google 





ch. 24.] 


BRIHAT JATAKA, 


203 


Saturn she will commit adultery;‘if it be that of Jupiter 
she will be the wife of a king; if it be that of Mercury, she 
will be of masculine nature and if it be that of Venus she 
will commit adultery with a persou of low caste. 

When the rising sign or the sign occupied by the Moon 
at the time of birth of a woman is either Sagittari or Pisces 
if the rising Trimsntnsa or the Trimsamsa oooupied by the 
Moon be that of Mars, she will possess many good qualities ; 
if it be that of Saturn, she will not indulge much in sexual 
union; if it be that of Jupiter she will possess many good 
qualities; if it be that of Meroury she will be a woman of 
knowledge and if it be that oE Venus she will not be chaste. 

When the rising sign or the sign occupied by the Moon 
at the time of birth of a woman is either Capricorn or AquA- 
rius, if the rising Trimsnmsa or the Trimsamsa occupied 
by the Moon be that of Mars she will lead a life of servi¬ 
tude; if it be that of Saturn she will join a person of low 
caste; if it be that of Jupiter she will be chaste; if it be 
that of Mercury she will be of bad conduct and if it be 
that of Venus she will be barren. 

6. The effects described for the rising Trimsamsa or 
those described for the Trimsamsa occupied by the Moon 
will come to pass according as the one Trimsamsa or the 
other is the more powerful. 

7. If, at the time, of birth of a woman, Saturu and 
Venus occupy each other’s Navamsa and aspect each other 
or, if the rising sign be either Taurus or Libra and the rising 
Navamsa be that of Aquarius, the woman will quench tho 
poisonous fire of her strong lustful desires by rncanB of 
other women assuming a masouliue character. 

8. If, at the time of birth of a woman, the 7th house 
from the rising sign or from the sign occupied by the Moon 
be not occupied by planets, and if such house be weak and 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



20 i 


BKIHAT JATAKA. 


[CH. 2 l. 


not aspected by benefio planets, the husband of the woman 
will be wicked ; if sucb 7ih house be occupied by Mercury 
the husband will be a hermaphrodite ; if such 7th house be 
a movable sign, the husband will be travelling in foreign 
lands (a) > if such 7th house be occupied by the Sun, the 
woman will be rejected by her husband > if it be occupied 
by Mars aspected by maleiic planets, she will become a 
widow while young, and if it be occupied by Saturn nspee- 
ted by malefic planets she will remain unmarried to an old 

Notes. 

(a). If it be a fixed sign the husband will remain in f»is 
place and if it be a common sign, he will travel to foreign lands 
but will be returning to his place every now and then. 

9. If the7tli house, from the rising sign or from the 
sign occupied by tho Moon at the time of birth of a woman, 
be occupied by several malefic planets, the woman will be¬ 
come a widow; if such 7th house be occupied by several 
benefle and malefic planets she will quit her husband and 

t marry another person and if such 7th house be occupied by 
a malefio planet (a), be weak, aud be aspected by a benefio 
planet ( b) the woman will be rejected by her husband. 

IE Venus aud Mars occupy each other’s Navamsa the 
woman will commit adultery ; and if the 7th house from 
the rising sign be occupied by the Moon, Venus and Mars, 
she will commit adultery with the premission of her hug" 
baud. 

Notes. 

(a) . Either the Sun or Mars or Saturn. 

[b) t Eh her Mercury or Jupiter or Venus. 

10. If at the time of birth of a woman, the rising sign 

be that of Saturn (a) or Mars ( b) and if it bo occupied by 
, the Moou aud Venus and aspected by malefic planets, the 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



ctt. 24.] 


BRTIIAT JATAK. 


203 


womnn and her mother will ounmit adultery j if the setting 
Navamsa be that of Mars and if the setting sign be aspec- 
ted by Saturn, the woman will possess a diseased genital 
organ ; and if the setting Navamsa be that of a benetio 
planet the woman will possess a tine genital organ and will 
become an agreeable wife. 

N otos. 

(a). Capricorn or Aquarius. 

(&). Aries or Soorpio. 

11. If, at the time of birth of a woman, the setting 
sign or the setting Navamsa be that of Saturn* the husband 
of the woman will be an old .man and a fool; if such sign 
or Navamsa be that of Mars, the husband will be of 
irascible temper bnt will be attached to his wife. If suoh 
sign or Navamsa be that of Verms, the husband will be 
beautiful and fond of his wife; if suoh sign or Navamsa be 
that of Mercury, the husband will be learned and intelli¬ 
gent. 

12. If the setting sign or the setting Navamsa at 
the time of birth of a woman be that of the Moon, the hus¬ 
band will be full of lustful desires and of a quiet nature. 
If such sign or Navamsa be that of Jupiter, the husband 
will possess courage aud other virtues and will have a con¬ 
trol over his passions and desires ; if suoh sigu or NavAinsa 
be that of the Sun, the husband will be of very soft nature 
aud will engage in many works (a). 

Notes. 

fa). According to some the reading of this portion of the 
text is Ratikarma instead of Atikarma , in which case the meaning 
is that thelmsbaud will indulge much in sexual union. Again if 
the sotting sign be that of one planet aud the setting Navamsa 
be that of another planet, then, the effects described for suoh 
sign or N&vamea, whichever is powerful, will come to pass. 


Digitized by 


Google 



206 


BRIItAT JATAKA* 


Cch. 24. 


13. If, at the time of birth of a woman, the rising 
sign be occupied by the Moon and Venm*, the woman 
will be envious of the prosperity of other persons and will be 
greatly mindful of her oomforts; if the rising sign be occu¬ 
pied by the Moon and Mercury the woman will be learned 
in the fine arts, will be in the enjoyment of oomfort and will 
possess many good qualities; if the rising sign be occupied 
by Venus and Mercury the woman will be beautiful, much 
liked by her husband and learned in music, vocal and in¬ 
strumental ; if the rising sign be occupied by the Moon, 
Mercury and Venus, the woman will be in the enjoyment of 
immense wealth and comfort and possessed of many good 
qualities. If the rising sign be occupied by Mercury, Jupi¬ 
ter and Venus, the same remarks apply* 


14. If, at the time of birth of a woman, the 8th house 
from the ascendant be occupied by a malefic planet, the wo¬ 
man will become a widow and the widowhood will oconr 
in the Antardasa period of the planet whose Navamsais oc¬ 
cupied by the lord of such 8th house* If the 8th house be 
occupied by a malefic planet and if the 2nd house be oc¬ 
cupied by a bcnefic planet the woman will die before her 
husband and if the Mood oooupy sign Virgo, Scorpio, Tau¬ 
rus or Leo, shb will have very few sons. 


15. If, at the time of birth of a woman Saturn be 
neither powerful nor weak, the Moon, Venus and Mercury 
be weak, and the Sun, Mars and Jupiter be powerful and 
if the risiug sign be odd, the woman will be of a masculine 
character (a). 

If, at the time of birth of a woman, Jupiter, Mars, Ve¬ 
nus and Mercnry be powerful and if the rising sign be an 
oven Sign, the woman will be of wide spread fame, will be 
vastly learned and learned also iu the Soeince of Divinity. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



Off* 2.6.] . BBIHAT JATAKA. 207 

Kotes; • f . 

(a). According to some tbe woman will'enjoy many men* 

16. If, at the time of birth of a woman, the 7th 
house from the rising sign be occupied by a malefic planet 
while the 9th house is occupied by some planet, the woman 
will without doubt become an ascetic of the class belonging 
to the planet occupying such 9th house (a). 

All that has been said in this ohapter apply to the posi¬ 
tions of the planets at the time of promise of gift of girl in 
marriage, of such gift and of marriage (ft), also at the time 
of query. 

Notes. 

(a) . And the other effects already described will fail. 

(b) . Provided such effects do not clash against the effects 
described in the chapters on Marriage, (vide Chapters 100 and 
103 of Briliat Samhifa). 


CHAPTER XXV. 

On DfeATU t * * • .. , v . i 

1. If, at the time of birth of a person, the 8th house 
from the rising sign be unocoupied and be aspeoted by a 
powerful planet* the person will die of an excess of the hu¬ 
mour belonging to such powerful planet (a).The part of the 
body attacked will be the part which such 8th house repre¬ 
sents in the body of the Kalapurusha (6). If several pla¬ 
nets aspeot the 8th house the part oftho body will ba 
subject to several attacks resulting from au excess of the 
various humors belonging to such powerful planets* and.death 
will ensue. But if the 8th house be occupied by the Sun, 
the death of the person will, be caused by fire; if it be 
occupied by the Moon the death will be caused by water *; 
if by Mars death will be caused by weapons; if by; Mercury 
it will be caused by fever; if by Jupiter it will be caused 

c 


Digitized by 


Google 


£ 



80S 


Bit]HAT JATAKA. 


foH. 25* 

by some unknown disease; if Venus, it will be caused by 
thirst; and if it bo occupied by Saturn death will be caused 
by starvation (c). Again, if the 8th house be a movable sign 
the person will die in foreigu lands; if it be a fixed sign 
lie will die in his own country ; and if it be a common sign 
lie will die oh hb way. 

Notes 

(a). Planets... Humor Planets.. Humor 

The' Sun......... Bile Jupiter..Phlegm 

The JBIuoa... Wind & Venus. Wind & 

¥% ./ phlegm phlegm. 

Mar8..V.. < .^...,B^14ei S u. Saturn..... .... Wind 

Mercury...... Ale 

three humors. 

(1) Vide'stanza 4 chapter 1. 

(c). If the planet be powerful there will bo death while- 
the person is ong&ged in a good work ; if tlie planet be weak 
death will ensue while the person is engaged in a bad work and 
if the planet be neither powerful nor weak the persou will die 
while engaged in a work ©f indifferent character. 

2„ If at the time of birth of a person the Sun and 
Mars occupy tlie 4th or the 10th house from the rising sign 
the person j will dio boing struck with stones. If 
the 4th, 7th and lUili houses be respectively ocpupierl by Sa- 
turn r the Moon and Mars, the person will die by falling in¬ 
to a well. If the Sun and Moon occupy sign Virgo and if 
they be aspected by a malefic planet there will be death 
caused by the person’s kinsmen. If the rising sign be a 
common sign and if it be occupied by the Sun and the 
Moop there will.be death by drowning.. . 

8. If) At the tirae^firth of & person,* Saturn occupy sign 
Cancer and the Moon sign capricorn the person will 
die from an attack of dropsy. If the Moon occupy sign 
Aries or Scorpio and bo between malefic planets, death will 
be caused by weapons or by fire. If the Moon occupy sign 
Virgo and be between malefic planets death will be caused 











oil. 25 ] BRIHAT JATAKA* 209 

hr a corruption of the blood or by want of blood. If tha 
Moon occupy sign Capricorn or Aquarius and be between 
malefic planets, there will be death by hangirig, by fifro dr 
by fall. 

4. If at the time of birth of a person, t lie 5th or the 
9th house be occupied by two malefic planets and if suck 
plauets be not ospected by benefio planets the person will 
meet his death by being shut up 'irt a prison or by other 
restraint. If the 8th house from the r rising sign contain a 
Sarpa or Nigala Drekkana (a) death will also result from 
imprisonment or other restraint. If Virgo be-the 7th house 
from the ascendant and if it be occupied by the Moon 
accompanied by a bonefio planet, if Venus occupy Bign Aries, 
and the Sun the rising sign! tlio person will die in his owu 
house and such death will be caused by a woman. 

Notea- 

fa.) Vide notes to stanza 16 of Chapter XXIII. 

5. If, at the time of birth of a person, (1) the 4tk 
house from the ascendant be occupied by Mars or the Sun 
and if the 10th house be occupied by Saturn or, (2) if the 
Sun, Mars, Satiirn and the waning Moon occupy the ascend¬ 
ant, the 6th house and the Uth house or, (8) if the Su* 
occupy the 4th house and if Mars which compies the 10th 
house be aspected by the waning Moon, the person will dio 
in each case boing stabbed with a spear. Again, i£ the Snu 
occupy the 4th house and if Mars, which cocupies the 10th, 
house* be Aspected by Saturn, the person will die being 
struck with a piece of wood. * 

6. , If, at the time of birth of a person, the 8th, 10th, 
1st, and 4th houses be occupied respectively by the waning 
Moon, Mars, Saturn and the Sun, the person will die being 
struck with a blub or fetick. If the 10th,' Vtb, 1st and 5tk 
houses bo occupied respectively by the waning Moon Mars, 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



210 


BBIHAT J AT AKA. 


[CH. 25. 

Saturn and the Sun > the death of the person will be caused 
by smoke, by fire* by imprisonment or by blows. 

7. If, at the time of birth of a person, the 4th, 7th and 
10th houses be respectively occupied by Mar9, the Sun and 
Saturn, the person will die by weapons, by fire or by the 
kiog. If the 2nd, 4fch and 10th houses be respectively 
occupied by Saturn, the Moon and Mars, the person will 
die of sores aud worms. 

8. If, at the time of birth of a person, the Sun occupy 
the 10th house and Mars occupy the 4th house, the person 
will die in cousequence of a fall from a vehiole or convey¬ 
ance. If Mars occupy the 7th house and the Sun, Moon 
and Saturn occupy the rising sign, the person will die being 
caught in a machine. If (1) sign Libra be occupied by 
Mars, sign Aries by Saturu and sign Capricorn or Aquarius 
by the Moon or (2) if the lQth, 7th aud 4th houses be 
respectively occupied by the waning Moon, by the Sun and 
by Mars the person will die in the middle of excrement. 

0. If tho waning Moon be ospected by powerful Mars 
and if Saturn occupy the 8th house, the person will die of 
discuses affecting the privities (a)—the part affected will be 
either eateu through by worms or cut with the laucet or 
burnt or blistered. 

. Notes. 

(a.) SaoU as piles and fistula iu the Pudendum Muliebre. 

10. If, at the time of birth of a person, the Sun and 
M‘trs occupy the 7th house, Saturn occupy the 8th house and 
tire waning Moon occupy tho 4th house, tho death of the 
person will be caused by birds. If the 1st, 5tb, 8th aud 9th 
liousos be occupied respectively by the Sun, Mars, Saturn 
and the Moon, the person's death will be caused by a fall 
from mountain top, by an attack of lightning or by the fall 
of a wall. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



ch. 25.] 


BSlfllT JTU.' 


211 


11. The causo of death of a person whose horoscope 
does not contain any of the Yogas enumerated above shall be 
determined from the 22nd Drekkana counted from the rising 
Drekkana at the time of birth of a person ; and death will 
be caused by the lord of such (22nd) Drekkana or by the lord 
of the sign of which the Drekkana is a division) whichever 
is powerful, by water, fire or other means belonging to such 
lord (n). 

Notes. 

(a.) Vide stanza 1 of this chapter, 

12. The place of death of a person will be that of the 
sign occupied by the Lord of the rising Navamsa (a) or it 
will be the place of the sign of the planet which occupies 
the same sign as that occupied by the lord of the rising 
Navamsa or it will be the place of the sign of the planet 
aspecting the lord of the rising Navamsa or it will bo tho 
place of the sign of the lord of the Navamsa occupied by 
the lord of the rising Navamsa (&). Tlio actual place of 
death shall be determined by a careful examination of tho 
several points. Tho period for which a person will remaiu 
insensible before death will be the time of oblique ascension 
of the portion of the rising sign below the horizon. If the 
rising sign be aspeoted by his lord, such period will be 
twice, aud if it be aspectcd by benefio planets, it will bo 
throe times, the time of such oblique ascension (c). 

Notes. 

(a) Aries—place frequented by sheep; Taurus—place 
frequented by oxen ; Gomini—a house; Cancer—a well; Leo— 
a forest; Virgo—water-bank; Libra—bazaar or store—house* 
Scorpio—-a hole; sagittarl—plaoo frequented by horses; Capri¬ 
corn—watery tracts; Aquarius—a house; Places—watery places. 

Tho above is general. If a distinct place of death be 
mentioned in connection with a Yoga relating to death, the death 
will occur only in such a place. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



£1? JWIHAT JATAKA. [OH. 25. 

(ft.) If different places of death are pointed out by different 
planets, the place belonging to the sign of the moat powerful 
planet will be the place of death. Again, of the two signs of a 
planet, the place of the Moolatrikona sign will be the place ot 
death, ' According to some; : the place of death is the partionlar 
portidn'of the litfuse belonging to the most powerful planet— 
■nch as the place of worship, the bath—room, the kitohen Ac* 
(vide atatiz’ul2 of Chapter II.) . , 

(e.) If the using sign be aspeoted by its lord and by a 
benefio planet the period of insensibility will be 6 times as long. 

13. If, at the time of birth of a person, the 22nd 
Drekkana from tlie rising Drekkana be a fiery Drekkana (a) 
the body 6t tliO person after death will be burnt and redu¬ 
ced to ashes.‘ 'If the 2*2nd Drekkaua be a watery Drekkana 
'(b) the body will be thrown into water; if such Drekkana 
be a Misra Drekkana (c) the body will be neither burnt nor 
thrown into water but allowed to dry up. If the 8th house 
contain a Sarpa Drekkana ( d) the body will be devoured by 
dogs, jackals, crows and the like. Thus has been described 
the change of the body after death. For a knowledge of 
the past and future life of a person and of the nature of 
such life tlio reader is referred to higher works ou horoscopy. 

Notes. 

. (a .) A Fiery Drekkana is the Drekkana of a malefio planet. 

(ft.) A watery Drekkana is the Drekkana of a benefio planet. 

(c.) A Misra Drekkana is the Drekkana of a benefie planet 
occupied by a malefio planet as well as the Drekkana of a malefio 
planet occupied by a beuefio planet. 

(d ) Sarpa Drekkanas ;—These are the 1st and 2nd Drek- 
kanas of Cancer, the 1st and 2nd Drekkanas of Seorpio and the 
3rd Drekkana of Pisces. According to Subhodhiui, the terms 
‘‘.Vyala varga” is interpreted inti the Drekkanas of Vyala 
Sarpa), Ciadhra (vulturo), K>lu (hog) aud the like. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBIHA.T JATAXA. 


213 


ca. 25.] 

14. If the lord of the Drekkana occupied by the Sua 
or the Moon, whichever is powerful, be Jupiter, the person 
has come from Dev&loka ^ if such lord be either the 
Moon or Venus, the person has come from Pitriloka ;if such 
lord be the 8un or Mars, the person lias come from the 
world of lower animals ; and if such lord be either Saturn 
or Mercury, the person lias come from the region of hell. 

If the lord of the Drekkana occupied by the Sun or the 
Moon, whichever is powerful, bo in his exaltation sign such 
last life of the person will be of an exalted character ; if 
such lord occupy a place between the exaltation and de¬ 
pression signs the last life will be one of middle importance j 
and if such lord occupy his depression sign tho iasfc lifo pf 
the person will be one of a low character. 

16. , If the 6th and the 8th houses be unoccupied* the 
person will, after death, go to the world of the planet most 
powerful of the lords of the Drekkanas of such (ith and 8th 
houses (a) ; or the person will gb to the world of the planet' 
occupying the 6th, 7th or the ; 8th home (6) % Again, if 
Jupiter occupy the 6th house br one of the Kendra houses 
or the 8th house and be lit the same time in his exaltation 
sign or if tbe rising sign be Pisces and Jupiter occupy it 
and be in the Navamsa of a beuefio planet while the other 
planets are weak, the person will obtain Salvation after 
death, (c) ' ' m;: ' 

Notes. 

(a). For the worlds of the several planets, vide Inst stansa. 

(b.) If two or more planets occupy (be 6th, 7th and 8th, 

houses, the person will go to the world of the, mpst powerful 
of them. t - 

(c). The next world may also be delermincd from the 
poBitiou of the planotS at the time bfdbatk asat 1 tho time bf 
birth of a person. ‘ * • * 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 




214 


Bill HIT JATAKA. 


[CH. 2$. 


CAPTER XXVI. 

On Lost Horoscopes. 

1. When a person is ignorant of tlio tiipe of his concep¬ 
tion or birth, the time of birth shall* when duly question¬ 
ed about, be determined from the Prosun Lagoa (a). If 
the 18t half of the rising sign be cut by the, horizon, the 
month of birth will be in the Utt&rayana (i) and if the 2nd 
half be cut by the horizon the month will be in the Dekslii- 
n&yana (c). 

Notes. 

(a) . Prasna Lagna : the rising sign at the time of qnery. 

(b) . Httarayana : the 6 months fi*om Capricorn to’ Gemini. 

(c.), Dekshinayaua : the 6 months from Cancer to Sagit- 

tari. 

2. If at the time of query the first Drekkana of a sign 
begin to rise, the sign occupied by Jupiter at the time birth 
will be the Prasna Lagna itself. If the 2nd Drekkana of a 
sign begin to rise at the time of query* the sign occupied 
by Jupiter at the time birth will be the 5th sign from the 
Prasna Lagna; if the 3rd Prekkaua of a sigu begin to rise at 
the time of query, the sign occupied by Jupiter at the time 
of birth will be the V*th sign from thePrasana Lagna (a'. The 
year of birth shall then be determined from the appearance 
of the person (6). If the Sun occupy the Prasana Lagna or 
if the Drekkana of the Sun rise at the time of query, the 
Ritu(a period of 2 months) of birth will beGreeskma(wlien the 
Sun passes through Gemini and Canoer) ; aud in the case of 
other planets their Ritushave been mentioned elsewhere 

(c). If the Ritu thus determined do not happen to be the 
Rita of ilio Ayana already determined, the correct Ritu 
shall be determined as explained in the next stanza (J). 

Notes. 

a* In other words, if the rising Dwadasamsa at the time 
of query be the first, the sign occupied by Japtier at the time 
ef birth will be the Prasana Lagna itself; ii the rising Dwada- 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRiHAf JATAKA. 


215 


oh. 26 .] 

samsa be the 2nd, the sign occupied bj Jupiter nt Hie time of 
birth Trill be the 2nd sign from the Prasna Lagn& and so on« 

t, As Jn pi ter takes 12 years to go found the heavens, if 
the number of circuits passed through by Jupiter from the time of 
birth be known, the age of the person ean be at once determined. 
For instance suppose Jupiter to occupy sign Scorpio at the time 
of qnery and sign Taurus at the time of birth, and suppose him 
to be in his 4th circuit. The age of the person will be3X 12 
+ 6 or 4*2 years. The cycle of Jupiter can be determined from 
the appearance of the person—from a rough estimate of 
his age. In the instance cited above the age of the person ia 
either 6, or 12 + 6=i8 or 24 + 6=30 dr 36+ 6= 42 and so 
on. If however the cycle of Jupiter cannot be easily ascertained 
from the appearanee of the person, the number of the cycle 
shall he determined from the part of body tonched by a person at 
the time. Io stanza 24 of chapter 70 of the Brihat Samhita, tho 
human body is divided into ten parts, each part corresponding 
to & Dasa period of 12 years, 

(1) . Feet and ankles. 

(2) . Shanks and knees. 

(3) . The thigh8 and genital organ, 

(4) . The loins and the navel. 

(5) . The belly. 

(6) . The breast and the bosoms. 

(7) . The shoulders. 

(8) . Tho neck and lips. 

(9) . Tho eyes and brows. 

(10) . The forehead and the head. So that if the belley he 
touched, it may be determined that at the time of query Jupiter is 
io his 5th round. So that the age of the person will be 4 X12 
or 48 years, plus the number of years taken by Jupiter to move 
from the eign occupied by him at the time of birth to the sign 
occupied by him at the time of qaory. 

(c). So that if the Sun occupy the Prosna Lagna or if the 
Drekkana of ths Sun rise at the time of query, the Rilu is 
Grecshme, 

-p 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



216 


BR1HAT JATAKA. 


[CH. 26 

If Yenns oconpy tbe Prasna Lagoa or if tlie Drekkaoa 
of Venus rise at the time of query, the Rita is Vasaota (when 
the San passes through Aries and Taurus). In the case of 
Mara and his Drekkana the Rita is Greeshma (Gemiui and 
Ganoer). In the ease of the Moon and her Drekkana, the 
Rita is Yarsha (Leo and Virgo). Xu the case of Meronry and his 
Drekkana, the Rita is Sarat (Libra and Scorpio). ] n the oase of 
Japiter and his Drokkuna, the Rita is Hemanta (Sagittari and 
Capricorn) In the oase of Saturn and his Drekkana the Rita is 
Sisira (Aqaarias and Pisces). If two or more planets ocoupy tho 
Prasna Lngna, the Rita of the most powerful planet will bo the 
Rita of birth- 

(d). Suppose the Ayana determined from stanza 1 to be 
the Uttarayana so that the month of birth is one between Capri¬ 
corn and Gemini. Suppose the Prasna Lagna to be occupied by 
the Moon whose Rita is Yarsha (Leo and Yirgo); in such a case, 
the Rita of Yetius, the alternative planet of the Moon viz the 
Yasauta (Aries and Tauras) shall be determined as the Rita 
of birth as explained in the 3rd stanza. 

3. If the Ritu do not agree with the Ayana then the 
Ritu of the alternative planet shall be determined as the Ritu 
of birth of a person (a). The Moon and Yonus are alternative 
planets. So arc Mercury and Mars (6), and so Jupibor and 
Saturn. If the iirst half of the rising Drekkana shonld 
rise at the time of query, the month of birth will be tbe 
first of the two months of the Ritu and if the second half 
shonld rise then the 2nd month of the Ritu will be the 
month of birth. The date of birth shall be determined from 
the portion of tbe half Drekkana that has risen above the 
horizon, (c) 

Notes. 

(а) . This point has been already explained, vide note (d) to 
the last stanza. 

(б) . According to the oommentator Mercury, Mars and the 
Sun are alternative planets. 


Digitized by 


Google 



toBIHAT JAtAKA* 


.217 


€H. 26.] 

(c). As the halODrekkana which may be rising at the time 
of query represents all the 80 days of -a month, if just one half 
of it should have risen above the horizon, the birth roast have 
occurred just after 15 days of the month, la other words, the 
date of birth may be determined from the portion of the half 
eign that has risen above the horizon by proportion. A Drek- 
kaua is 10 degrees; half a Brekkana is 5 degrees and a thirtieth 
part of it is 10 minutes, so that every lOmiuntes of (he rising half 
Brekkana represents a day. It will be convenient if the Lagnn 
ephuta i. e . thoexaot longitude in eigus, degrees and minutes of 
the point of the ecliptic cut by the horizon be determined in the 
fiist instance (vide Appendix)* 

4. The Learned Brahmins in the Science of horoscopy 
say that the number of degrees passed over by tho Sun in 
any particular sign represents the lunar day at tho timo of 
birth (a). If the Prasna Lagna be a day-sign tho birth 
will have occurred at night and if it be a night-sign, the birtli 
will have occurred by day; the ghatika of birth shall ho 
determined from the portion of the rising sign that has 
risen above the horizon (b). 

Notes. 

(a) . Beginning from tho first lunar day in the Moon’s in¬ 
crease. Suppose the San to occupy the 24th degree of Sngittnri 
at the time of birth. The lunar day or Tithi at the time of birth 
is the 24th day from the first day in the Moon’s iucrease or 
24-15 or the 9th day in her wane. 

(b) . The length of the day or night of birth Veing known 
it is represented by the rising sign and the Lagna Sphuta will 
give ns the exact proportion of the Sign that has risen above 
the horizon. By the Rule of Three we cau arrive at the exact 
time of birth from Sun-rise or Sun set. When this is known Ihn 
horoscope may be oast with the help of the astronomical tablos 
or the Almanao. The fiist fonr stanzas therefore give us a 
ompleto procoss for the disoovery of the time of birth of * 
crson from UieFrasua Lagna. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



213 


jmiHAT jataka. 


[on 26. 

5. According to some the lunar month of birth shall 
be determined from the Navamsa occupied by the Moon at 
the time of query (a)* Again, the sign occupied by tho 
Moon at the time of birth will bo either the Prasna.Lagna 
or the 5th house or 9th house from it whichever is most 
powerful. If it be difficult to determine which of the three 
signs is most powerful} the sign occupied by the Moon will 
be the sign represented by the part of body of Kalapurusha 
that may happen to bo touched by a person at the time of 
query or the sign may be determined from the like indioa* 
tions occurring at the time of query (5). 

Notes. 


(a). The rule stated in the Text is very vague. What tho 
author meanB is thus explained by the commentator. 


Suppose each Navamsa to be divided into 9 equal parts; 
then/ if at the time of query the place ocoupied by the Moon be 

Beyond the And within the The lnnar 

month will be 


(1) . 8th part of the > 
Navamsa of Arios. J 

(2) . 7th part of the > 

Navamsa of Taurus ) 

(3) . 6th part of the > 
Navamsa of Gemini ... $ 

(4) . 5th park of the > 
Navamsa of Oancer ••• y 

(5) . 4th part of the > 
Navamsa of Leo ... y 

(6) . 7th part of the > 
Navamsa of Virgo ••• > 

(7) . 6th part of the > 

Navamsa of Libra ) 

(8) . 5th part of the > 
Navamsa of Scorpio ... > 


7th part of the 
vamsa of Taurus 

Cth part of tho 
vamsa of Goimui 

5th part of the 
vamsa of Oaucer 

4th part of the 
vamsa of Leo 

7th part of tho 
vamsa of Virgo 


| Kartikara. 
^ Margasira 
^ a " \ Pousha. 
Na ; | Magha. 

| Phalguna. 


6th part of the Na* | 
vamsa of Libra ... X 

5th part of the Na- C 
vamsa of Scorpio 

4tb port of iheNa-( 
vamsa of Sugitiuri ... \ 


Ghaitra. 


Vaisakha. 


Jyeshtha. 



Digitized by ^.ooQle 



DRIHAT J AT AKA. 


'210 


CH. 26 .] 


(9). 4tli part of the) 3rd part of the Na-C i i 
Navamwi orSagiltari... y vamsa ot Capricorn ...( 

(10) . 3rd part of the) 2nd part of the Na- C g rftVana 
N. of Capricorn. ... y vamsa of Aqnarias ... \ 

(11) . 2nd partfof the > 5th pnrfc of the Na-< Bhadrapftda 

N a vamsa of Aquarius... ) vamsa of Pisces 1 r 

(12) . 5r.h part of the ) 8th part of the 
Navatnsa of Pisces ••• § vntusa of Aries. 

(6). Forjnstanoe, if, at the time, oreaturos representing any 
of the signs of the Zodiao bo seen or their sounds heard, the 
Moon will oconpy Buoh sign at the time of birth. 

C. The sign occupied by the Moon at the time of birth 
of a person will be as many signs removed from the sign 
occupiod^by tho Moon at the time of query as the Moon is 
removed from the rising sign at the time of query (a). 
B at if the rising sign be Pisces, then Pisces will be the sign 
occupied by the Moon at the time of birth. (In case of 
doubt), thejbign shall be determined by any articles of food 
that may be brought, any figures that may appear or by any 
sounds that may be heard at the time (6). 


Aswajnjti. 

••• ( 


Notes. 

fa). For instance, suppose Scorpio is the rising sign ond 
Pisces the a sign ' oconpied by the Moon at the time of query. 
From Scorpio to Pisces is 5 signs ; the 5th sign from Pisces is 
Cancer. Cancer will therefore be the 6ign occupied by tho Moou 
at the time of birth of a person. 


(5), From articles having the shape of, or in any way 
connected with the creatures representing the signs of tho 
Zodiao and from the sounds of tho like creature,the sign oooupied 
by tbe Moon may be determined. In all these eases, it is assum¬ 
ed, that an &ll~pervading Intelligent Being helps ail astrologer 
by various signs and suggestions. 

7. The rising sign at tho time of birth will be tho 
Bign of tbe lord of the rising Navamsa at the time of query 
(a). Or, the rising sigu at the timo of birth will be &s 


Digitized by VjOOQle 



220 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


[CU* 26# 

many signs removed from Prasna Lagna as the Drekkana 
ocoupied by the Sun is removed from the rising Drekkana 
at the time of query (2/). 

Notes. 

(a). Supposing tbe rising Navamsa At the time of qnery to 
be that of Sagittari, the risiug sign at the time of birth is Sagit¬ 
tari. 

(&). Suppose the rising Drekkana At the time of query to 
be the 2nd Drekkana of sign Gemini and the Drekkana oocupied 
by the Sun at the same time to be tire 3rd Drekkana of Sagittari. 
The number of Drekkauas from the oue to the other is 20. 
Therefore the rising sign at the time of birth is the 20th sign 
from Gemini; subtracting 12 from 20 it is the 8th sign from 
Gemini i. e., sign Capricorn, 

8. Or, multiply the Sphuta (Longitude) of the planet 
or of the most powerful planet occupying the rising sign 
by the number of inches iu the length of the shadow of a 
twelve inch Sanku (a straight rod) placed vertically on a 
horizontal surface and iu the sun ; divide the product by 
12. The remainder will give the rising sign at the time of 
birth (a). According to others, if the querent be seated at 
the time of query, the 7th house from the rising.sign at tho 
time will be the Lagna at tho time of birth ; if the quereut 
be tying at the time, the 4th house from the rising sign will 
be the Lagna at the time of birth ,* if the querent be stan¬ 
ding at tho time, then, the 10th house will be the L?tgna 
and if he be rising from his seat, then the rising sign itself 
will bo the Lagua at the time of birth ( b)• 

Notes. 

(a.) Suppose the longitude of the planet, or, (whore there 
are several planets) of the most powerful planet occupying tho 
ribirg sign to be 4 signs 10 degrees and 20 minutes aud suppose 
the length of the shadow to be 4J incites, the product of the two 
numbers is 10 sigus 16 degrees and 30 minutes, This divided 


t 


Digitized by t^ooQle 




Cff. 26.] 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


221 


by 12 gives as remainder 7 signs, 16 degrees and 30 minutes- 
T(ie Lagna nb the time of birth is therefore the 8th sign from 
Aries, which is sign Scorpio. 

Ib .) According to Subhodhini, the 7th, 4th, 10th and 1st 
houses are not with reference to the Frasna Lagna as explained 
by Bhatta Utpala bat with reference to the Lagna obtained from 
the process given in the first half of the text, that is, from sign 
Scorpio in the instance quoted in note (a)* 

9. 1£ the rising sign at tho time of query be Taurus 
or Leo, multiply the Ligua Sphuta (the longitude of the 
ascendant) by 10 ; if it be Gemini or Scorpio, then, multi¬ 
ply the sphuta by 8; if Aries or Libra, then by 7; if Virgo 
or Capricorn, then, by 6; and if it be any of the remaining 
signs, then by tho number of such sign from Aries (a). 
Again, if the planet occnpyiug the rising sign be Jupiter 
multiply the Lagna sphuta by 10; if it be Mars, by 8; if 
Venus by 7 ; if any of the remaining planets by 5; if several 
planets occupy the rising sign, then multiply the Lagna 
Sphuta by the factor for each of such plauets. Add up the 
several products and Cud the sum (&). 

Notes. 

In this and in the next stanza the author states a process 
for discovering the Nakshatra (asterism occupied by the Moou) 
of the querent, his wife, brother, sou aud enemy. Tue figures 
given in the text are known as those of Rasi Gunakara aud 
Graha Guoakara—Zodiacal aud Planetary factors, referred to iu 
the chapter on Ashtakavarga. 

(a.) For instance, if Cancer be the sign, it being the 4th 
sign from Aries, the factor for Oauoor is 4. The factor for 
Sagittariis 9; that for Aquarius is 11 aud that for Pisoes is 12. 

(b.) Suppose the Lagna sphuta to bo 5* 10° 20' and sop- 
pose Jupiter and Venus to ocoapy the rising sign. Now, from the 
L&nga Sphuta it is evident that the rising sigu is Virgo. The 
factor for Virgo is 5, multiplying 5* 10? 20, by «*>, wc get 26 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



222 


CUIIIAT JATAKA. 


[cn. 26 

21° 40' Dividing Ibis by 12 we get as remainder 2* 21° 40' (R.) 
Again, the factor for Jupiter is 10 and that for Yenus is 7. 
Multiplying 6 B 10° 20' by 10 we got 53* 13° 20 / Dividing by 12 
we got as remainder 5* 18° 20'. Again, multiplying 5* 10° 20' by 
7 we get 37* 12° 20'. Dividing by 12 we get I* 12° 20'. Adding 
this to 5 B 13° 20' wo get G B 25° 4(P (G> Adding together Rand 
Q we get 9 B 17° 20. 

10. Multiply this sum by 7, add 9 to tho product if 
the rising sign be a moveable sign ; orsubstract 9 from the 
product if the rising sign be a common one or leave the 
product as it is if the rising sign be a fixed one (a). Divide 
the sum or the difference or the produot as the case may be 
by 27. The remainder will represent the Nakshatra of ibe 
querent at the time of birth. By a similar process applied 
to the Splmta of the 3rd, 5th, 6th and 7th houses (5), wo 
shall get thcNaksluitras of the querent's brothor, sou, onomy 
and wife. 

Notes* 

(a,) According to Bh&tta Utpala, if the rising Drekkana 
1)0 the first Drekkana of the sign, 9 is to be added; if it be the 
2nd, 9 need neither he added to nor subtracted from the producto 
and if it ho the 3rd, 9 is to be snbtraotod from the produot. 

(6. If you add 2 signs to the Lagna splmta, you got tho 
splmta of the 3rd house which represents a person's brother ; if 
you add 4 signs to the Lagoa spliuta, you get the sphuta of tho 
5th house which represents a person's son; if you add 5 signs to 
the Ligna sphuta you get the spliuta of the 6th house which 
represents a person’s enemy and if you add 6 signs to the Lagna 
spliuta, you get the sphuta of the 7tb house which represents a 
person’s wife. Multiply the several splmtas by tbe Zodiacal 
factors of the several houses and by the factors of the planets; 
occupying such houses, add the products, multiply the 6um 
by 7, add or subtract 9 if necessary, divide the sum or remainder 
by 27, the remainder will give you the Nakshatra of the 
several persons. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRIHAT JATAKA. 


223 


ch. 26.] 

11. Multiply the earns sunl (a) by 10, 8, 7, 5; add or 
substract 9 if necessary, as stuted above ; divide the result 
by their appropriate numbers (6) you will obtain the year, 
Ritu, Month, Lunar day, day or night,Nakshatrs,the ghatika 
the rising sign and the rising Navamsa at the time of birth. 

Notes. 

In this and in the following three stanzas, the anthor states 
another process for discovering the year, month &o. of the birth 
of a person. 

(o’) The sum obtained at the end of stanza 9. 

(6.) These and the process of division will bo found ox- 
plained in the next three stanzas. 

12. From the product of the sum by tO shall be deter¬ 
mined the year (age), Ritu and month of birth (a) ; and from 
the product of the sum by 8 shall be determined the Paksha 
(fortnight) and Tithi (lunar day) (6). 

Notes. 

(o.) This produot is the first of the four products referred 
to in the Iasi stanza with 9 added to or subtracted from it if 
necessary. Divide the quantity by 120, the remainder will give 
the age of. the. person. . Divide the ■ same quantity by G, the 
remainder will give the Ritu of birth from Sisira. Divide the 
same quantity.by 2, the remainder will give the first or the 
second month of the Ritu. , 

(t•) This produot is tlie seoqnd of the four products referred 
to in the last stanza with 9 added or subtracted if neoessnry. 
Divide this quantity by two, the remainder will gjve.thefortnight 
of birth. Divide the same quantity by 15, the re main der will 
give the Innar.day. . ,, 

«... • . * ... n •( ...• '..C 

• 13.', Front the produot. of the sum by . 7 shall be deter¬ 
mined whether the birth occurred by day or. by night,, and 
also the Nakshatra. . ; , 

■ 


Digitized by t^ooQle 



224 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


[CH. 26 f 


Notes. 

This prod not lathe 3rd of the four products mentioned in 
the 11th stanza with 9 added or subtracted if necessary. Divide 
the quantity by 2, the birth will have occurred by day or night 
according as the remainder is,one or more tbau one. Divide the 
some quantity by 27, the remainder will give the Nakshatra from 
Aswini. 

14. Prom the product of the Sum by 5 shall be deter¬ 
mined the Ghatika, the rising sign, the Hora and the rising 
Navauisa at the time of birth. 

J ' • Notes. 

This product is the last of the four products mentioned in 
stanza 11 with 9 added or substrnoted if neoessary. Divide the 
quantity by the number of Qhatikas in the day or night of birth 
as the case may be, the remainder will give the Ghatika from 
Sun-rise or Sun-set at the time of birth. Divido the same 
quantity by 12, the remainder will give the risiug *igu from 
Aries. Divide the quantity by two, the hora of birth will be the 
1st or 2nd according as the remainder is 1 or more thau 1. Divide 
the quantity by 9, the . r^maiuder will give the uumber of 
the rising Navamsa from the 6rst Navamsa of the rising sign, , 

Similarly divide the quantity by 12, the. remainder will give 
the number of the rising Dwadasamsa ; divide the quantity by 
3, the remainder will give the rising Drekkana. 

N. B .—In all the above cases, it is evident that the remain¬ 
der will be in the shape of signs, degrees and minutes. The 
nnmber representing the stym, is the number representing the 
particular Nakshatra, year, month, Paksha, Tithi, Ghatika &o 
at the time of birth—the degrees and minutes only go to increase 
the nnmber by unity. 

15. Multiply by two the number of Matras in a 
person’s name ; add the length of shadow to it; divide the 
sum by 27; the remainder will give the Nakshatra, at the 
time of birth, from Dhanishta. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



€h. 27.] 


BRIHAT JATAKA. 


225 


Notes. 

The name is the Dame given to a person at the Namakarana 
ceremony. A short vowel sound is counted as one Matra and’a 
long vowel sound is counted as two, and a oonsonent is counted 
as half a Matra. The length of the shadow of a twelve inoh 
Sankn shall be added iu inches. 

1*\ The Dik numbers are : 


East 

2 

West 

15 

8. East 

3 

N. West 

2l 

South 

14 

North 

9 

S. West 

10 

N. East 

8 

Multiply by 15 the number for the Dik or 

direction which 


the querent faces ; add to the product the number of persons 
facing the same dik, divide the sum by 27 The remainder 
will give the Nakshatra of the person from Dhanishta. 

Notes. 

This stanza coutains another process again to discover the 
Nakshatra, 

17. Thus has been stated by me various processes for 
the construction of a lost horoscope. Intelligent pupils shall 
study them carefully and use them. 


CHAPTER XXVII. 

On The Drekkanas. 

1. The 1st Drekkana of sign Aries is a man with a 
white cloth tied round his loins, black, facing a person as if 
able to protect him, of fearful appearance and of red eyes 
and holding an axe in bis hand. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a man and is armed. 
Mars is its lord. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



226 


MIITTAT J AT AKA* 


[ch. 27. 


2. According to Yavanachariar the 2nd Drekkana of 
sign Aries is a woman fond of ornaments and sweetmeats ; 
with a pot-like belly, of tho face of a horse, thirsty, aud 
single-legged. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a woman aud of a quadru¬ 
ped ; the face resembles that of a bird also. The Sun is its lord. 

3. The 3rd Drekkana of Aries is a man of a wicked 
nature, learned in the arts, of a brown color, fond of work, 
failing in his attempts to carry out a work, holding up a 
stick in his hand, dressed in a red garment aud angry. 

Notes. 

This Drekkftna is of the shape of a man and is armed 
Jupiter is its lord. 

4. The 1st Drekkana of Sign Taurus is a woman 
with hairs cut and growing in curls, with a pot-like belly, 
dressed in a burnt garment, thirsty, and fond of food and 
ornaments; 

Notes. . 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a woman and carries fire. 
Venus is its lord. 

5. The 2nd Drekkana of sign Taurus is a man skilled 
in works connected with agriculture, grain, house, cows, 
music, dance, painting, writing and the like, skilled at the 
plough and in works connected with a conveyance, with a 
neck bent like that of the bullock, thirsty, with a face like 
that of the ram and dressed in dirty garments. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of both a man and a quadru¬ 
ped. Meroury is its lord. 

6. The 3rd Drekkana of sign Taurus is a man with a 
body resembling tbat of an elephant, with large teeth, with 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



CH. 27.] BRIHAT JATAK. 227 

feet resembling those of the camel, of a brown color, attached 
to the ram and to the auimals of the forest. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is both of human and quadruped shape. Saturn 
is its lord. 

7* The 1st Drekkana of sign Qemini is a woman fond of 
needle work, beautiful, fond of decoration, without children, 
with raised hands, haying attained puberty and full of lust¬ 
ful thoughts. 

Notes* 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a woman. Mercury is its 
lord.-: • • • ‘ • , . 

8. The 2nd Drekkana of sign Getnini ; is a man reside 
ing in a flower garden, wearing a mail coat, holding a bow in 
bis hand, fond of fight, carrying arrows, his face like that of 
a Garuda (Brahmani kite), his thoughts directed to play, 
children, ornaments and wealth. 

* Notes 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a man and is armed. It is 
also of the shape of a bird. Veuus is its lord. 

9. The 3rd Drekkana of sign Gemini is a man wearing 
ornaments, possesing many gems, wearing a mail coat and tar¬ 
get, carrying a bow in his haud, learned in all the arts and 
a literary writer. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a man and is armed. 
Saturn is its lord. 

10 # The 1st Drekkana of Cancer carries leaves, roots 
and fruits, has a body resembling that of the elephant ; 
lives in a forest near sandal trees, has feet as large as that of 
the camel, has a face like that of the hog and a neck like 
that of a horse. 


Digitized by 


Google 



228 


BKIRAT JATAKA. 


[ch. 27. 


t Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a quadruped. The Moon 
is its lord. 

11. The 2nd Drekkana of sign Canoor is a woman 
wearing in her head lotas flowers, carrying a snake, hard¬ 
hearted, young, crying in a forest and holding a branch of 
the Palasa tree in her hand. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a woman. Mars is its lord. 

12. The 3rd Drekkana of sign Cancer is a man sur¬ 
rounded by a snake, sailing in a boat in the sea on account 
of procuring ornaments for his wife, wearing ornaments 
made of gold and with a flat face- 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is one of the shape °f * man and a snake. 
Jupiter is its lord. 

13. The 1st Drekkana of sign Leo is of the shape of a 
vulture and a jackal, seated on the top of Salmali tree, resem¬ 
bling a dog in appearance and is also of the shape of a man 
dressed in dirty garments and separted from his parents 
and crying aloud. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a man, a quadruped and a 
bird. The Sun is its lord. 

14* The 2ndtDrakkana of sign Leo is a man of the shape 
of a horse, wearing a slightly white garland of flowers 
in the head and covered with deer-skin and flannel, unapproa¬ 
chable like the lion holding a bow in his hand and with a 
a bent nose. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a man and is armed. Jupiter 
is its lord. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBlHAT JATAXAi 


229 


CH. 27.] 

15. The 3rd Drekkana of Leo is a man with the face 
of a bear, the pranks of a monkey, 'with a olnb in his hand 
carrying fruits and meats, with a long beard and whiskers 
and with curling hairs* . 

Notes. '; 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a man and a qnadraped 
and is armed. Mars is its lord. 

16. The 1st Drekkana of 8 : gn Virgo is a Virgin girl 
carrying a pot filled with flowers, dressed in dirty garments 
and fond of cloths and wealth and proceeding to the house 
of her preceptor. 

Notes* : * 

Tlus Drekkana is of the shape of a woman* Mercury is 
its lord, 

, 17. The 2nd Drekkana of sign Virgo is a man holding 
a pen in his hand, black, with a cloth tied round his.head, 
examining items of receipt and expenditure, with a large 
bow in his hand and covered with hairs all over'.his body. 

: \ ... , • • ,Jf t • • • . - ... - 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a man and i& armed. Sa¬ 
turn is its lord, 

18. The 3rd Drekkana of sign Virgo is a woman of 
yellow oolor, dressed in white silk carrying a pot and ladle 
in her hands, pure and proceeding to a temple. 

Notes/'' 

ThiB Drekkana it of the shape of a woman* Venus is its lord. 

19. The 1st Drekkana of sign Libra is a man hold¬ 

ing a balance in one hand, skilled in weighing and measur¬ 
ing, with articles in his hand to be weighed or measured and 
with his thoughts directed to the determination of the 
prioe of such articles. " 5 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



2$0 


9RJ8AT JAT.4KA. 


[op, 27. 


; ..-ti.'l I i i ;l : ./ i! ■ . I O NotPS. . ! . . , .ill . i 

liiin This Drekkana is of the shape of a man.. Venus is r its lord. 


20.' The £nd Drekkana of sign Libra is a man with the 
faoe of a vulture, holding a pot iu his hand, wishing to fall 
down,, suffering from hunger and thirst and with his 
thoughts directed to his wife and children. 


Notes* 


, ; This Prekkaoa is of the shape of a man and a bird. Saturn is 
its lord. 

21. The 3rd Drekkana of sign Libra is a man with the 
face of a horse adorned with gems, scaring animals in the 
woods carrying a golden quiver and wearing a mail coat, 
carrying fruits and meat, monkey-like in appearence and 
holding a bow in his hand. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of$ man and a quadruped 4 Mer¬ 
cury is Us lord. 

a 

22. The 1st Drekkana of sign Scorpio is a beautiful 
woman, naked and without ornaments, quitting her place, 
lauding after a long sea voyage and with a snake coiled 
round her legs- 

t Not?S. ; 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a woman aud a serpeut* 
Mars is its lord. . j ; s • 

23. The 2ud Drekkana of Scorpio is a woman with a 

bocjy like that of a turtle or pot, desiring the comfort of her 
plaop and with a serpent coiled round her body on account, 
of her husband. ... ' V 

- .1.1 . . . / ill J lAr. .1 .! .«> ... . \ ; 

Notes. 

ijtin 1» j \ ' !<• . J. . I J ,'> u !.o , u :. ...... • 

.•Ij TJu^Drekkaa jsj of tho sjiape of a woman and asirpeiit, 
Jupiter is its lord. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BBIHAT JIT AKA. 


23) 


oh. 27.] 

24. The 3rd Drekkana of sign Scorpio is a lion with a 
broad and a flat face like that of a turtle, scaring dogs, 
deer, jackals and hogs in the woods and lording over a coun¬ 
try abounding in sandal trees* 

Notes. 

This Drekkaua is of the shape of a quadruped, Tbo Moon is 
iis lord. 

25. The 1st Drekkana of sign Sagittari is a man with 
the body of ahorse, with a long bow in his haud, stopping 
in his hermitage aud watching over the several articles re¬ 
quired for Sacrificial rites. 

Notes. 

This Drekkaua is of tbo shape of a man and a quadruped and 
is armed. Jupiter is its lord. 

26. The 2nd Drekkana of sign Sagittari is a beautiful 
woman, bright as gold and the Champnka flower, seated on 
a throne of middle size, and picking up the gems of the 
Sea. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shapo of a woman. Mars is its lord. 

27. The 3rd Drekkana of Sagittari is a man with a 
long beard and whiskers, of the color of gold and the cham- 
paka flower, seated on a throne with a club in his hand and 
dressed in white silk and dear skin* 

Notes. 

This Drekkauna is of tho shape of a man aud is armed. The 
Suu is its lord. 

28. The first Drekkana of sign Capricorn is a man 
coverd with hairs, strong as the sea monster, with a body 
like that of a hog, wearing a nose string and fetters and 
with a deformed faco. 

Notes. 

This Drekkaua is of tho shapo of a man leaded with fetters. 
Saturn is its lord- 

F 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



232 BRMATf jatakA. [ch. 27- 

29. The 2nd Drekkana of sign Capricorn is a woman 
skilled in the arts, with eyes like the petals of the lotus, 
black, hankering After various things and wearing ear- 
ornaments made of iron* 

Notes. 

TbisDrekkna is of the shape of a woman. Venus is its lord. 

80. Tne 3rd Drekkana of sign Capricorn is of the shape 
of a Kinuara (aoelestial being) covered with flannel, with a 
a quiver, a bow and a mail coat and carrying on his should¬ 
ers a pot set with precious stones. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is armed. Mercury is its lord. 

81. The 1st Drekkana of sign Aquaiius is a man with 
tho face of a vulture, with his thoughts directed towards the 
gain of oil, liquor, water, and meals and dressed in flanuel, 
silk and deer skin* 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a man. Satnrn is its lord, 

32. The 2nd Drekkana of sign Aquarius is a woman in 
a car burnt with tho wood of Salmali in it and collecting 
iron, living iu a forest and dressed in dirty garments. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a woman who carries fire. 
Mercury is its lord. 

S3. The 3rd Drekkana of sign Aquarius is a black man, 
with hairs in his ear, wearing a crown and carrying bark, 
leaves, the oil of bdellium, iron and pots from one place to 
another. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a man. Ve nus is its lord 

34, The 1st Drekkana of Sigu Pisces is a mau with 
the vessels of sacrificial rites, pots, pearls, gems and conch 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BRl SAT JATAKA. 


233 


CH. 28.] 


shells in his hands, carrying ornamenfces and sailing in a boat # 
iu the sea for the purpose of decorating his wile. 


Notes. 

Jupiter is the lord of this Drekkana. 

25. The 2nd Drekkana of sign Pisces is a woman with 
a long flag-staff and banner, sailing in a boat to the* other 
shore of the sea accompanied by her friends and with a face 
bright as the Champaka flower. 

Notes. 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a woman. The Moon is its 

lord- 

36. The 3rd Drekkana of sigu Pisces is a man with 
a snake coiled round him, standing naked on the brink of 
a pit in a forest, suffering from thieves, from fire and from 
hunger and weeping. 

Notes, 

This Drekkana is of the shape of a snake. Mars is its lord- 


Notes.—The author has stated the use of these descriptions 
of the Drekkanas in his Yatra. If the Drekkana be of agreeable 
appearance, carrying fruits, flowers, gems and pots and aspected 
by benefio planets, there will be sneoess. If they be of hideous 
appearance, armed and aspeoted by malefic planets, there will be 
disgrace and failure ; if they carry serpents or fetters there will be 
delirium and imprisonment. The Drekkana description is also of 
use in tracing out theives according to Prithnyasas, son of 
Varaha Mihira, iu his Sh&dpauohasika, a work on Horary As¬ 
trology. 

CHAPTER XXVIII. 

Conclusion. 

1, 2 & 8. In my work on Jalaka I have treated of the 
following. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



BUIHAT JATAKA. 


[OH, 27. 


234 
CL. 

1. Definitions and Elementary principles*(Zodiacal) 

2. Do Do Do (Planetary) 

3. On Animal and Vegetable Horoeoopy. 

4. On Nisboka kala or the time of conoeption . 

5. On Matters connected with birth time. 

6 f On Bearishta or Early death. 

7. On Ayardaya or the determination of length of life. 

8. On Planetaay divisions and sub-divisions of life known 

as Dasas aud Autardasas. 

9. On Ash taka varga9. 

10. On Avocation. . 

11. On Raja yoga or the birth of kings. 

12. On NabhasaTyogns.. 

13. On Chandra or lunar Yogas. 

]4. On Double plauetary Yogas, 

15* On Ascetic Yogas. 

16. On the Naksbatras or the Moon in the as ter is ms. 

17. Ou the Moon in the several signs of the Zodiac. 

IS. On the Sun, Mars and other planets in the several 
signs of the Zodiao. 

19. Ou planetary aspects- 

20. On the planets in the Bhavos. 

21. On the planets in their several Vargas. 

22. On Miscellaneous Yogas* 

23. On Malefic Yogas. 

24. On the Horsoopy of women. 

25 # On Death- 

26. On the Discovery of a lost Horoscope- 

27. Ou the Drekkanas. 

I shall now give a summary of the subjects treated of 
in my work on Yntra. 

4, 5 & 6. 

Oh 1. Prasna Prabheda. 

2. Tithibaia. • 

3. Naksbatrabhidhana- 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



oh. 28.] 


brihat jataka. 


235 


4, Varaphala. 

5. Mohnrta Nirdesa. 

C. Chandra Bala. 

7* Lagua Niscbaya, 

8. Lagna Bheda* 

9. Grahnsodhi. 

10. Apavada. 

11. Misraka* 

12. Tanuvepana. 

J 3. Gahyakapnja. 

14. Swapnadhyaya. (Dreams) 

15. Suanavidbi. (bath) 

16. Grabayajna. 

• 17. Prayana. (Travels) 

18. Saknnnrnta. 

19. Vivahakala* 

20. Grahakarana. (on the planets) 

The last of the above subjects has been separately 
treated of by me in my Astronomical work known as Pancha- 
sindhanta. Thus the three branches of the Jyotisha Sastra 
viz Astronomy, Horoscopy and Samhita have been treated 
of by mo for the bonofit of intelligent students. 

7. These brief works have been written by me on a 
full study and examination of the elaborate works of the an¬ 
cient writers. If any important points be found omitted 
I crave the forbearance of the learned critics. 

8. If any portion of the text be found omitted by the 
writer who copied or the teacher who taught, the learned 
will kindly supply the omission, setting aside all feelings of 
jealousy- Again, if there be found in the text errors, im¬ 
perfections or omissions, the learned will kindly make the 
necessary corrections and supply what is wanted. 

9. Yaraha Mihira, the son"of the Brahmin Aditya- 
dasa from whom he received his education, obtained the 
boon of knowledge from the Sun in the village of Kapitha, 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



236 


BB1HAT JATVKA. 


[Cfl. 28. 

spent his days in the court of UjjHyani in the provinoe of 
Avanti and has written this neat work on horoscopy after 
a careful examination of the works of the ancient sages on 
the subject. 

10. I have been enabled to write the*present work by 
the the grace of the Sun, of Vasishtha, and of Adi tyadasa, 
worshipped by me. Salutation to the ancient writers of 
horoscopy. 


BND. 


Digitized by OjOOQle 



a.ffetstdxx:. 

Required the Lagna Sphutara, that is, the Longitude 
of the Ascendant at 89 gh. 30v* gh. from Sunrise on Friday 
the 28th May 1886, for a place whose.Lntitude is 11°. 

, Prom the Almanac we find that the Sunjentered Tau¬ 
rus at 56 gh* 40v. gh. on the 12th May, and quits the sign 
at 12. gh 27v. gh. on the 13th Juno. Therefore time taken 
by the Sun to move through sign Taurus 

= 3gh. 20v. gh.+ 81 days+ 12 gh. 27 v. gh. 

= 31 days 15 gh. 47v. gh* = 1,12,5007. ghs. 

Time from Sun-rise on the 28th May to the end of the 
Sun’s course through Taurus = 16ds 12 gh. 27v. gh. 

= 58,327v* ghs. 

Time of oblique ascension of> = 5 gh. 6v. gh. 

Taurus for Latitude 11* > = 3067. gh. 

Therefore time of oblique ascension of the portion of 
Taurus to be passed over by the Sun on the morning of the 
306X58,327 

28th =-ss 2gh. 397. gh. 

1,12,500 

Subtracting this from 39gh. 30v. gh* we get time of 
oblique ascension of signs from Gemini = 89 gh. 307. gh 
—2 gh. 397. gh = 86 gh. olv. gh. 

Prom Table B we find that time of oblique ascension 
Of signs for Gemini to Scorpio = 31 gh. 867. gh. 

Therefore time of oblique ascension of portion Sagit- 
tari that has risen above the horison. 

= 36 gh. 51 v* gh.—31 gh. 36 y. gh. 

= 5 gh. 15v. gh. = 315v. gh. 

Time of oblique ascension of the 80 degrees of sagit- 
tari for Latitude 11% is 5 gh. 21 v. gh. (Vide Table A) 
= 321 y. gh. 

Therefore portion of Sagittari that [has risen above the 
80X315 

horizon --- - 29* 26 l . Sagittari being the 9th sign 

321 

from Aries, 

^ Lagna Sphutam required is 8* 29* 26 1 . 

The Bhavasphutam process is too complicated to be given 
here. The Reader is referred to Baskaracharya’s work cn 
Astronomy. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



II 


1 

C3 

CO 

8 

C3 


‘S. 

C^ 

.C3 

N 


Co 

£ 


«• 

5= ** 

.§) </> 

!> r». 


CO 

■§ 

C3 


C3 

• »s. 


C3 

«® § 
^.5 

•2 <2 
|L s 
8 &> 

§ S 

^ ' 4 '- 
^ Q> 

^ I 

O' p 
O ^c 

.£ a- 


o 

« 

.S? 


s .s 


E$ 

O 

CO 


Co 


Uj 

5a 

s 


m 


©rH©qeO<4»COCOI>aOOi©.He«»eO<^cOCDt^OOOi 



CD 

► 

eoeocoeoe^e^eoc^c^rHrirHiHiH co *o 

S 

6 

'* ^ <* ^ oo co 

h 

o\5 

> 

3!3!2s£:i252!2S &•“* coft05t>uacooooco^f 

'C^COncOCOCONNNNMrlHHHH 

<5 M 

6 

'4* 4* 

1 * 

£? t* 
ft o 

> 

WeCNH^l^CDOMiMOOltNfflkOcOHOOOtO 

* » 



Q 

6 

CO C0 CO CO ^ <* 

1 

> 

NNNNfMNNNNffCWMNNNNHHHH 

"Eb 



rt 

Cfi 

6 

CO CO 

6 

> 

NOOOOh wo *^c0<0t>»000>0*^»000 41 ION 
H.-HW(N<NW«WlMN«N««mcO«CO« 

*Si 

u 


8 

*W 

6 

CO co 

£ 

> 

WWNOOOffl^^COOJHOCONOCHOl^lOOO 
CO CO CO CO nrH HrlHNNWNN 



3 

6 

^ -* 4» 4< CO CO 

& 

> 

£2:22'J2£r2£?SM2S: ow,,p,oooow * 0 ^ 

C«CO'^^^'^^^OCOiOCO HHHh 



£ 

6 

<4» ^ ^ co co. 

6 

> 

®5 1 5 r 2 fl 5 , "' e0k0l ^ OSr,4c G*©*>Oir-<cocooo©©i 
^TpTpTpCOCOcOCOcO H rl rl rt N W 

Q> 



►4 

6 

4< 4» ^ ^ CO CO 

1H 

> 

C0fOO©-<eO-^COlN.oOOrHOO’«ftcOt^©©(M^ 
H h HHHnWW^NWWWWWO 

01 

a 


p 

m 



u 

6 

CO co 

"n 

> 

CO CO CO CC CO C0 IN N~ OOOOOOOOOhHimCI 

WiNWNNNWNWNNlNWNWWCiJCOCOCiJ 

f 

$ 

6 

co co 

i 

> 

^COCO*4»COCM.-iO©GO*'.©cO'4»CO«r-l©Oil>i 
HrtrinHrlHH COCO 

0 



& 

6 

CO CO co CO <* 

i 

> 

8S999^!9 38S;88SSSsaSS)SS 


o 

<4» 4» 



©rHfflOO^t«lO©t>.00©©rH<MOO^COC01>OI)© 



HHHrtHHrtrtrlH 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 





Ill 



Digitized by ^.ooQle 



IV. 


.§> 

to 

% 

^5 


& 

S3 


• I) 

<o 

S3 

as: 

03 

<a 

S= 

as: 

.03 

••*** 

<S) 

as: 

8 

<o 

03 

S3 

0l 

.0^ 

^03 

03 


.to 

* 

=5 


Os 


S3 


S3 

« 

a? 


Co 


QQ 

Uj 


to 

jai 


fc 

rfo 


a< 


S3 ^ 
§ £ 


-s: 

to 

8 

03 




03 

^ • s 


*OJ 

N 

03 


03 

g 

S3 

*o> 

SO 

8 

J2 

*03 

i5 


Co 



n 

g 

> 

0 fc^® 3 rftO<OC» 3 i 0 ^fu 3 ^i 

CMCMtOCOOMCMi-t^CMCCfH 


OQ 

s 

6 

tCtOtO^C 003 CMCMi 3 rH 


Is 

> 

<OCOl> 2 l>NNOlHOHO 

■*r rH COrlHHiQWHN 


c\a 
◄ K 

d 

iOH<pOM 50 WO>^ 0 >^Q 
lOtO^^OOCO^HH fS 


Capri¬ 

corn. 

6 

USNttlMtOHHOOO^Ofli 
N«J^*ri»OUS»OCfJ rt CO 

H( 0 H$Otf»OU)O«Q)Q 
«J^>*lCOWwn« t 5 to 


i 

> 

<C«^XNNN®HOhO 

CO tO CM ^ C l rH tO 


i 

d 

(ON COhOhCO OUJO OO 
^^COCONNHH tO tO M 3 



> 

WN»^«OHr 4 oeOCftO< 3 > 

H ^ CO ^ t* rf <M CO to <M 


I 

d 

n« 0 -<(COOOO Q 05 tO 


1 

> 

t»^WOiM««ONHNH 
rH CO 1-1 >“I rH COHN 



d 

WHCOOWOU 5 Q«#a^O 
COWNNHH tO to ^ 9 


i 

> 

Jj^go^oc^gga.^ 

o 

H 

£ 

_ d _ 

ocoowoioq^oco®^ 

WNNrtn CD tO CO CO 


6 

*3 

► 

rflHWtOUJOONaOOQOp 

CO tQ CM ^ 1-1 to ^ 


d 

»f 3 r!^>Ot 0 Ot 0 C 3 ^f! 00^05 
NNriH CD to tH CO 00 CM 


i 

► 

CitOOrHOtOtON^CO^CO 

Cl tO tO <N tO tO Tf< rH to Tjl 


i 

! 

_O 

0>(5 0 WQH|OJ*<HQCOQ'« 1 ) 

CM ~ rH <0 'O f rfi CO 03 CM CM 


'8 

’3 

> 

OOtOOlOClH'^HMClCClM 

CO CM COCO© 3 CM.OCO<«lfrl 


1 

d 

tOOtO©'* 05 <*j 05 C 000 C 005 

HH CD tO rf Hh CO CO Ol CM tH 


Taurus. 

> 

oacoo—'OtOtOCM^CO^CO 

CO CO rH U 3 CM rH to 


d 

O 5 tOOM<O 5 '^ 0 >COaOOOOOCO 

COtO^f^COCOCMCMi-lrH 


i 

► 

co ©^to^o*. ostoaot^oct^ 

CO to CM taio 3 >r-itO -«Ji 


3 

_ . 

^O^C5H;OOCOGOCOt^CCOO 
to to CO CO CM CM rH rH 

From. 

Aries. 

Taurns. 

Gemini. 

Cancer. 

Leo. 

Virgo. 

Libra. 
Scorpio. ... 
Sagittari. ... 
Capricorn.... 
Aqnarias. ... 
Pisces. 




Digitized by 


Google 







V, 




oSS ' 0 *^^ 0160 

*— 1 »-H 

OOOOOOoOO 



Ms. 

4 

0 

11 

1 

11 

4 

2 

4 

7 

OOO^NHNHOW 

1 —• I—t 

^fOOONOflOWOW 

<0 

53 


C 

jJJOhOhoo -<00 

CONHWOHHNn 

rH >1 ri 65 rt « H 

to 

<55 

<55 

to 

€ 

i 

§ 

< 

g 

< 

Mars . 

Rahu . 

Jupiter . 

Saturn . 

Mercury . 

Keta . 

Venus . 

Sun . 

Moon . 

a B* a a 

SSBBslS-Si 

u e t> 

A „ OJ P 3 

”=IS-i2eB 

" = iS « * n £ .® 
t> ctf fC aq ^ ooS UJ 

5 

'> 


*mv*£ 4*uejl 

* 8 JU 9 ^ 61 <un*«g 

’BJBoX QZ soue^ 

=2 


Ds. 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

0 

IS 

i2 

6 

6 

0 

18 

s 

21 

m frlH 

<S> 



H<OWri«a^HTf 




^OOHpHhhOhO 

nnnonohow 

OHOOOHOrtO 


i 

CD 




§ 

Q 

as 

H 




S< 

42 

< 

Moon 

Mars 

Rahu 

Jupiter 

Saturn 

Mercnry 

Ketu 

Venus 

Sun 

Jupiter 

Saturn 

Mercury 

Ketu 

Venus 

Sun 

Moon 

Mars 

Rahu 

Ketu 

Venus 

Sun 

Moon 

Mars 

Rahu 

Jupiter 

Saturn 

Mercury 

35 : 


*8j«eX OI. aoo H 

*sjuoX gx le^iduf 

•sjsa.C 1 u*ex 


— 




€ 

> 

1 

Co 

<6 


• oooto^acNcoeoo 

Q —> NHh 

cq^«OoOOOO^OOO 
— CQ T-i Ol »H 



aWCO'fOCJ^O’J'O 

^ 1-1 n »H 

*^O«000<D0 

^hSh^h ®” 00 

CO 

OQ 

^OoOOOOOOr-1 

.NNNNnejQHH 

nonohonnn 

< 

I 




*« 5 > 

£ 

£ 

< 

S 2 2la ® b " 
oq^ £ W t-j oq S W 

Rahu 

Jupiter 

Saturn 

Mercury 

Ketu 

Venus 

Sun 

Moon 

Mars 

Mercury 

Ketu 

Venus 

Sun 

Moon 

Mara 

Rahu 

Jupiter 

gatum 



sasoX 9—ung • 

‘GUttoi 8t uqu^ 

*sj*&£ 11 Janaien 


Digitized by 


Google 












VI 

TO FIND OUT THE CORRECT LOCAL TIME. 


I. BY DAY. 


Draw a pretty-large semi-cirole on each side of a well- 
planed and smooth oblongular plank. Place its edge along 
a straight line drawn east to west on a smooth level ground, 
the plank being inclined at an angle with the plane of the 
horizon, equal to the complement of the latitude of the 
place, so that a straight needle fixed at the centre of the 
semi-oircle and at right angles to the plane of the plank 
will point to the Pole and the plane of the plank will be 
parallel to the plane of the equator. The edge of an ob- 
longnlar piece of wood placed at the centre will serve as 
well as a needle. Now divide the semi circle into 12 equal 
parts, marking the points of division with the figures from 
C down to 12 and from 12 up to H. The divisions repre¬ 
sent the hours. If tho diameter be about a cubit in length 
each division may further be divided into 30 or 60 equal 
parts, so that the position of the shadow of the needle will 
give the time within a minute. Now apply the equation 
of time and the result will be the local clock time or the 
mean solar time required. This can be converted into 
Ghatikas and Vighabikas from sun rise from the table 
shewing the time of sun rise for each day. 

Notes:—(1). The latitude of the place may be found 
from a pretty good Atlas or it may be ascertained by noting 
the altitude of the pole-star both at the time of its culmi- 
n ition and the time of its depression and taking the mean* 

(2) , The complement of the angle of latitude may be 
marked on a piece of solid wood and the portion may be 
out out in the shape of a fine wedge and made to support 
the plauk of the inclined dial. 

(3) The east and west line may be marked pretty 
correctly with the help of a mariner’s compass or it may be 
found by marking tho two points of contact of the end o: 
the shadow of a straight rod filed vertically at the centre 
of a circle drawn on a smooth, horizontal surface, with tho 
circumference of the circle both before and after mid-day 

-the line joining the two points being due east and 

west. 

(4) . A level, horizontal ground may be prepared with 
the help of a spirit-level. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



Table Shewing the Equation of Time, for India. 


VII. 


equation of time. 


DKC. 

£ooo®oi®oot-M:to«o^.n»Mi } , ei rt„o i ooHHHNw»» 

i r + 

► 

o 

K 

whhhh va Tf ^ eo (N rH ^con locoei -t n ■** w 



“S!S r 'gggSgS8'*255SS M 2S;gg rt iaSg!SSS C0 ®222 

02222!!i^?5 N ® , ^? <y5WOT '^' , <*'^^'^'O u 5w»iotftMSua«5(O<otc«o«o 

SEPT. 

"3S8;;SS2SSSSg2Sg3S®SS“8^£$ < ’ 0 gi* t ' j 

0 OO OH HHNNMrtCQC0^^Tf«5W5®t0Ot*fc'N0000000>0>0»O • 

1 " s 

AUGUST. 

«~SS33&§aS*S$;s;52~93S?3 w Sf?8 c '£;SS®S;!' 0 

0®wioie«5>o»ioinio^-f^'.'*^nnM(«Ma W ciHH H rtooo 

+ 

| JULY. 

^ , «g^B“Sgg5:g“ s SSl3Sg4PSfe- ,0 ®SS2!22SS22 t ' 

geocooo^^^i^'if'^fiiraioiotftuaouaudiocDcococo^cocDcoocDcoco^ 

+ 

ti 

as 

s 

^gS®gggSS rt gggS-'S^gg'*E;g5S®SS$r 0 Sg 

JSMWHrtHrtHriCOOOOOOOOHHrtrtHMHMSllnn 
• 1 + 


MAY. 

-’’SSagggSiSSfSSgggSgSSSgggSSS^gSSS 1 

E»co«ooococoeo«oocooococococoeoeocococococooacocccocO(M(M(Mc<i 1 

i 

| APRIL. 

“SSS2&S2S Ma :£2S' 0 ^?2E:*i e0oo S2$£^ e *3 <0 °2 0i000a o>** M » 

MJ W rn U5 ^|t N rf CO irt <M rl r-teO^Uar-ICSlO^lOiHCNtNeOrfiC 

gWflOflON^NNHHHOOOO OO OOOHHHHHNM^MNC* 
+ +1 



a 

5 

"83“S88“2g8*-§SS<=>gS3 t '3S2Sfe3®3g3’ 0 S82 

S22 N r!!Jr! H 00000»®0)0>#OC«bbtstDtOtfKD»a»Ott^^i 

nnririrtHNHHHH 

d 

8 

®i2w§ **oo»aoe2i£i>2So*cacot'-^rHi>coooeii<©gi.-ie<ie©’'j'<*eoea 

HHNN N WNNNMNeiJ Hf^ ^ f CO N H kO ^ 

0 £2 22 2 Z2 !5 3 3 3 3 55 5 3 5* *» ■* so <o eo eo eo eo eo eo eo 

HH rlHHHHHHHHHHHHHrlHHHHHHHH-HHH 


| 

«;S5-gS£S53«8$SS$®g3Sg3 l 'gg83&;S 35*238 

B'w^^^io»0(c©i>fc'NflOoofl»aooc ohh ^hnnnn wwcoco 

| i—4 H i-4 H ^ rH rH pH rt H H H H 

DATE. 

H«eQ^U)«0J>000>OHNC0’fUJ©l>000»OHNW' , #W®N000iOH 

HHHHHHnHHHNNNN«WNN©INeO» 


Digitized by 


















VIII. 

II. AT NIGHT. 

Attach equal weights to the ends of a long fine striug 
and throw the string over two fine metallic wires each about 
a foot in leugtli fixed regally between supports and at the 
height of about 5 or o feet from’the ground, running east 
to west, and about 5 or 6 feet apart from each other. Now 
the twopliunblinos are certainly vertical,and the plane pass¬ 
ing through them will be a vertical plane. This plane may 
be made tb pass through the Pole star about the time of its 
culmination or depression by slightly moving the string 
over one of the wires to the east or west till the two plum- 
lines hide the Polo star to an observer stationed 2 or 3 

foot to tho South of the southern plurnbline and [looking 
» 

with one eye, the other eye'being closed. We have thus 
seoured the plane of the'meridian. Now attach the ends 
of a slightly tight string to the two plumblinea about their 
middle points. The observer may now lie down below, with 
his face turned up, the head supported by a pillow and one 
eye placed exactly under the two strings running north and 
south so that the upper string is wholly concealed by the 
lower and observe the transit of stars across the strings- 
The Almanac gives the time of culmination of the Vernal 
equinox for each day of the year and also the times at 
which particular stars culminate after the culmination 
of the vernal equinox. If the two times be added, we get 
the time of culmination of a particular star from 12 noon 
that day. But if the sum exceed 24 hours then subtract 
from it 23 hours and 56 minutes, the remainder will be tho 
time of culmination of the Star from 12 noou that day. 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



IX. 


TABLE E . Shewing ihe time of culmination <?/ the Sun awl the 
Vernal Equinox. 


Month. bate. 

Sun’s 

culmina¬ 

tion. 

Julmina- 
bion of V. 
equinox. 

Month. Hate. 

kirn’s iCulmina^ 
culmina- tion ofV. 
tion. 'equinox. 


h.' m. 

h. in. 


h. m. 

h . m. 

Jannary 1 

12 4 

5 17 

July o 

•12 4 

17 5 

7 

6 

4 63 

12 

5 

10 41 

13 

9 

4 30 , 

18 

G 

16 17 

19 

11 


24 

6 

15 5* 

25 

13 

6 42 

30 

G 

15 80 

81 

14 

3 19 

Angnst 5 

G 

16 7 

February 6 

14 

2 55 

11 

5 

14 43 

12 

14 

2 32 

17 

4 

14 19 

lb 

14 

2 8 

23 

8 

13 56 

24 

13 

1 44 

29 

12 1 

13 82 

March 2 

12 

1 21 

September 4 

11 59 

13 9 

8 

11 

0 57 

10 

67 

12 45 

14 

9 

0 34 

, 16 

65 

12 21 

20 

8 

0 10 

22 

53 

11 68 

26 

G 

23 43 

28 

61 

11 34 

April 1 

4 

23 19 

October 4 

49 

11 11 

7 

2 

22 65 

10 

47 

10 47 

18 

12 1 

22 32 

16 

46 

10 23 

19 

U 59 

22 11 

22 

45 

10 0 

25 

58 

21 47 

28 

44 

9 86 

May 1 

57 

21 24 

November 8 

44 

9 13 

7 

56 

21 ; 0 

9 

44 

8 49 

13 

66 

20 87 

15 

45 

8 26 

19 

56 

20 13 

21 

40 

8 2 

25 

57 

19 60 

27 

47 

7 38 

81 

57 

19 20 

Pocombor 8 

50 

7 15 

Juno 6 

58 

19 2 

9 

52 

G 51 

12 

11 69 

18 39 

15 

55 

G 28 

18 

12 1 

18 15 

•21 

11 68 

G 4 

24 

2 

17 63 

27 

12 1 

5 40 

80 

3 

17 28 






Digitized by t^ooole 







X. 


TABLE F i Showing the timee\at which the eeveral etare culminate 
after the culmination of the Vernal Equinox, 


Stars* 

tTimes. 

Stars. 

Times. 

Aswiol 

h. m, 

1 48 

\, 

Augiras 

h. m. 

12 47 

Bharani 

2 

86 

Apar 

12 

48 

Krittika 

8 

40 

Apamvat ... ... 

18 

2 

Holtini ... 

4 

28 

Obitra 

13 

17 

Agni 

6 

18 

Vnsisbtta 

13 

17 

Mrigasirsba ... ... 

6 

27 

Maricbi 

13 

41 

Ardra 

5 

4g 

Swati 

14 

8 

Prajapati 

6 

49 

Visakha 

14 

42 

Agnstya 

6 

20 

Anuradha 

15 

66 

Mrigavyasa ... 

6 89 

Jyesbta 

16 

20 

Punarvasn 

7 

87 

Moo la 

17 

20 

Fushya 

8 

86 

F. Asbadha . 

18 

10 

Aslesba 

6 39 

Abhijit 

18 

30 

Magha 

10 

0 

U, Ashadba ... 

18 

85 

Fulaba 

10 

63 

Srayana 

19 

42 

Krutn 

10 

66 

Sravisbta 

20 

81 

F. Fhalguni. 

11 

G 

Sataya 

l 22 43 

U. Pbalguui ... - 

11 

41 

P. Bbodradada... 

22 

66 

Fnlastya ... ... 

11 

46 

U Bbadrapada... 

0 

2 

Atri 

12 

7 

Itevati 

Dhruva (Pole Star) 

1 

7 

Hasta 

12 

26 

1 

10 


Note: As the Vernal Equinox ig subject to a retrograde motion of oyer 
60 sooonds a year, tables B. and F. will have to be prepared from the 
Alraauao for the year. 



Digitized by t^ooole 





This preservation photocopy 
was made and hand bound at BookLab, Inc. 
in compliance with copyright law. The paper, 
Weyerhaeuser Cougar Opaque Natural, 
meets the requirements of ANSI/NISO 
Z39.48-1992 (Permanence of Paper). 



Austin 1994 


Digitized by ^.ooQle 



Digitized by ^.ooQle 



Digitized by 



Digitized by 



Digitized by 



Digitized by 



Digitized by 


GoogI 



Digitized by 




The borrower must return this item on or before 
the last date stamped below. If another user 
places a recall for this item, the borrower will 
be notified of the need for an earlier return. 

Non-receipt of overdue notices does not exempt 
the borrower from overdue fines. 


Harvard College Widener Library 
Cambridge, MA 02138 617-495-2413 



Please handle with care. 

Thank you for helping to preserve 
library collections at Harvard. 



































